Project Gutenberg Etext of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens#38 in our series by DickensThis is version 10a, from a separate source than version 10



Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to checkthe copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping anelectronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.

**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, andfurther information is included below.  We need your donations.

Great Expectations

by Charles Dickens

July, 1998  [Etext #1400]

Project Gutenberg Etext of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens******This file should be named grexp10a.txt or grexp10a.zip*****

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, grexp11a.txtVERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, grexp10b.txt

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless acopyright notice is included.  Therefore, we do usually do NOT! keepthese books in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our books one month in advanceof the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final tillmidnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is atMidnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  Apreliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, commentand editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have anup to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizesin the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program hasa bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] alook at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see anew copy has at least one byte more or less.

Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  Thetime it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hoursto get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyrightsearched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  Thisprojected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our valueper text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six textfiles per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then thetotal should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion EtextFiles by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-thirdof that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless wemanage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostlyfrom Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and anassortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a fewmore years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as wedon't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and aretax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project GutenbergP. O. Box  2782Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.orgif your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, ifit bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browserto view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts byauthor and by title, and includes information about howto get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could alsodownload our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  Thisis one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or anyWeb browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirrorsites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listedat http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edulogin: anonymouspassword: your@logincd pub/docs/books/gutenbergcd etext90 through etext99dir [to see files]get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong withyour copy of this etext, even if you got it for free fromsomeone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not ourfault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statementdisclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you howyou can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXTBy using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmetext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and acceptthis "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receivea refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext bysending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the personyou got it from.  If you received this etext on a physicalmedium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTSThis PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by ProfessorMichael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association atCarnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among otherthings, this means that no one owns a United States copyrighton or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy anddistribute it in the United States without permission andwithout paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forthbelow, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etextunder the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerableefforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domainworks.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and anymedium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among otherthings, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate orcorrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damageddisk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computercodes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGESBut for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive thisetext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, includinglegal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE ORUNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVEOR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THEPOSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days ofreceiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within thattime to the person you received it from.  If you received iton a physical medium, you must return it with your note, andsuch person may choose to alternatively give you a replacementcopy.  If you received it electronically, such person maychoose to alternatively give you a second opportunity toreceive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHERWARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU ASTO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR APARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties orthe exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so theabove disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and youmay have other legal rights.

INDEMNITYYou will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, costand expense, including legal fees, that arise directly orindirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or bydisk, book or any other medium if you either delete this"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and          does *not* contain characters other than those          intended by the author of the work, although tilde          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may          be used to convey punctuation intended by the          author, and additional characters may be used to          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent          form by the program that displays the etext (as is          the case, for instance, with most word processors);          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the     net profits you derive calculated using the method you     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon     University" within the 60 days following each     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royaltyfree copyright licenses, and every other sort of contributionyou can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project GutenbergAssociation / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





GREAT EXPECTATIONS  [1867 Edition]

by Charles Dickens



Chapter I

My father's family name being Pirrip, and my Christian name Philip,my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or moreexplicit than Pip.  So, I called myself Pip, and came to be calledPip.

I give Pirrip as my father's family name, on the authority of histombstone and my sister,--Mrs. Joe Gargery, who married theblacksmith.  As I never saw my father or my mother, and never sawany likeness of either of them (for their days were long before thedays of photographs), my first fancies regarding what they werelike were unreasonably derived from their tombstones.  The shape ofthe letters on my father's, gave me an odd idea that he was asquare, stout, dark man, with curly black hair.  From the characterand turn of the inscription, "Also Georgiana Wife of the Above," Idrew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly.To five little stone lozenges, each about a foot and a half long,which were arranged in a neat row beside their grave, and weresacred to the memory of five little brothers of mine,--who gave uptrying to get a living, exceedingly early in that universalstruggle,--I am indebted for a belief I religiously entertainedthat they had all been born on their backs with their hands intheir trousers-pockets, and had never taken them out in this stateof existence.

Ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as the riverwound, twenty miles of the sea.  My first most vivid and broadimpression of the identity of things seems to me to have beengained on a memorable raw afternoon towards evening.  At such a timeI found out for certain that this bleak place overgrown withnettles was the churchyard; and that Philip Pirrip, late of thisparish, and also Georgiana wife of the above, were dead and buried;and that Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and Roger, infantchildren of the aforesaid, were also dead and buried; and that thedark flat wilderness beyond the churchyard, intersected with dikesand mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on it, was themarshes; and that the low leaden line beyond was the river; andthat the distant savage lair from which the wind was rushing wasthe sea; and that the small bundle of shivers growing afraid of itall and beginning to cry, was Pip.

"Hold your noise!" cried a terrible voice, as a man started up fromamong the graves at the side of the church porch.  "Keep still, youlittle devil, or I'll cut your throat!"

A fearful man, all in coarse gray, with a great iron on his leg.  Aman with no hat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tiedround his head.  A man who had been soaked in water, and smotheredin mud, and lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and stung bynettles, and torn by briars; who limped, and shivered, and glared,and growled; and whose teeth chattered in his head as he seized meby the chin.

"Oh!  Don't cut my throat, sir," I pleaded in terror.  "Pray don't doit, sir."

"Tell us your name!" said the man.  "Quick!"

"Pip, sir."

"Once more," said the man, staring at me.  "Give it mouth!"

"Pip.  Pip, sir."

"Show us where you live," said the man.  "Pint out the place!"

I pointed to where our village lay, on the flat in-shore among thealder-trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church.

The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down,and emptied my pockets.  There was nothing in them but a piece ofbread.  When the church came to itself,--for he was so sudden andstrong that he made it go head over heels before me, and I saw thesteeple under my feet,--when the church came to itself, I say, Iwas seated on a high tombstone, trembling while he ate the breadravenously.

"You young dog," said the man, licking his lips, "what fat cheeksyou ha' got."

I believe they were fat, though I was at that time undersized formy years, and not strong.

"Darn me if I couldn't eat em," said the man, with a threateningshake of his head, "and if I han't half a mind to't!"

I earnestly expressed my hope that he wouldn't, and held tighter tothe tombstone on which he had put me; partly, to keep myself uponit; partly, to keep myself from crying.

"Now lookee here!" said the man.  "Where's your mother?"

"There, sir!" said I.

He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over hisshoulder.

"There, sir!" I timidly explained.  "Also Georgiana.  That's mymother."

"Oh!" said he, coming back.  "And is that your father alonger yourmother?"

"Yes, sir," said I; "him too; late of this parish."

"Ha!" he muttered then, considering.  "Who d'ye live with,--supposin' you're kindly let to live, which I han't made up my mindabout?"

"My sister, sir,--Mrs. Joe Gargery,--wife of Joe Gargery, theblacksmith, sir."

"Blacksmith, eh?" said he.  And looked down at his leg.

After darkly looking at his leg and me several times, he camecloser to my tombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted me back asfar as he could hold me; so that his eyes looked most powerfullydown into mine, and mine looked most helplessly up into his.

"Now lookee here," he said, "the question being whether you're tobe let to live.  You know what a file is?"

"Yes, sir."

"And you know what wittles is?"

"Yes, sir."

After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to giveme a greater sense of helplessness and danger.

"You get me a file."  He tilted me again.  "And you get me wittles."He tilted me again.  "You bring 'em both to me."  He tilted me again."Or I'll have your heart and liver out."  He tilted me again.

I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to him withboth hands, and said, "If you would kindly please to let me keepupright, sir, perhaps I shouldn't be sick, and perhaps I couldattend more."

He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the churchjumped over its own weathercock.  Then, he held me by the arms, inan upright position on the top of the stone, and went on in thesefearful terms:--

"You bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file and them wittles.You bring the lot to me, at that old Battery over yonder.  You doit, and you never dare to say a word or dare to make a signconcerning your having seen such a person as me, or any personsumever, and you shall be let to live.  You fail, or you go from mywords in any partickler, no matter how small it is, and your heartand your liver shall be tore out, roasted, and ate.  Now, I ain'talone, as you may think I am.  There's a young man hid with me, incomparison with which young man I am a Angel.  That young man hearsthe words I speak.  That young man has a secret way pecooliar tohimself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and at his liver.It is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that youngman.  A boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed, may tuck himselfup, may draw the clothes over his head, may think himselfcomfortable and safe, but that young man will softly creep andcreep his way to him and tear him open.  I am a keeping that youngman from harming of you at the present moment, with greatdifficulty.  I find it wery hard to hold that young man off of yourinside.  Now, what do you say?"

I said that I would get him the file, and I would get him whatbroken bits of food I could, and I would come to him at theBattery, early in the morning.

"Say Lord strike you dead if you don't!" said the man.

I said so, and he took me down.

"Now," he pursued, "you remember what you've undertook, and youremember that young man, and you get home!"

"Goo-good night, sir," I faltered.

"Much of that!" said he, glancing about him over the cold wet flat."I wish I was a frog.  Or a eel!"

At the same time, he hugged his shuddering body in both his arms,--clasping himself, as if to hold himself together,--and limpedtowards the low church wall.  As I saw him go, picking his way amongthe nettles, and among the brambles that bound the green mounds, helooked in my young eyes as if he were eluding the hands of the deadpeople, stretching up cautiously out of their graves, to get atwist upon his ankle and pull him in.

When he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a manwhose legs were numbed and stiff, and then turned round to look forme.  When I saw him turning, I set my face towards home, and madethe best use of my legs.  But presently I looked over my shoulder,and saw him going on again towards the river, still hugging himselfin both arms, and picking his way with his sore feet among thegreat stones dropped into the marshes here and there, forstepping-places when the rains were heavy or the tide was in.

The marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as Istopped to look after him; and the river was just anotherhorizontal line, not nearly so broad nor yet so black; and the skywas just a row of long angry red lines and dense black linesintermixed.  On the edge of the river I could faintly make out theonly two black things in all the prospect that seemed to bestanding upright; one of these was the beacon by which the sailorssteered,--like an unhooped cask upon a pole,--an ugly thing whenyou were near it; the other, a gibbet, with some chains hanging toit which had once held a pirate.  The man was limping on towardsthis latter, as if he were the pirate come to life, and come down,and going back to hook himself up again.  It gave me a terrible turnwhen I thought so; and as I saw the cattle lifting their heads togaze after him, I wondered whether they thought so too.  I lookedall round for the horrible young man, and could see no signs ofhim.  But now I was frightened again, and ran home withoutstopping.

Chapter II

My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was more than twenty years older thanI, and had established a great reputation with herself and theneighbors because she had brought me up "by hand."  Having at thattime to find out for myself what the expression meant, and knowingher to have a hard and heavy hand, and to be much in the habit oflaying it upon her husband as well as upon me, I supposed that JoeGargery and I were both brought up by hand.

She was not a good-looking woman, my sister; and I had a generalimpression that she must have made Joe Gargery marry her by hand.Joe was a fair man, with curls of flaxen hair on each side of hissmooth face, and with eyes of such a very undecided blue that theyseemed to have somehow got mixed with their own whites.  He was amild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dearfellow,--a sort of Hercules in strength, and also in weakness.

My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes, had such a prevailingredness of skin that I sometimes used to wonder whether it waspossible she washed herself with a nutmeg-grater instead of soap.She was tall and bony, and almost always wore a coarse apron,fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and having a squareimpregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles.She made it a powerful merit in herself, and a strong reproachagainst Joe, that she wore this apron so much.  Though I really seeno reason why she should have worn it at all; or why, if she didwear it at all, she should not have taken it off, every day of herlife.

Joe's forge adjoined our house, which was a wooden house, as manyof the dwellings in our country were,--most of them, at that time.When I ran home from the churchyard, the forge was shut up, and Joewas sitting alone in the kitchen.  Joe and I being fellow-sufferers,and having confidences as such, Joe imparted a confidence to me,the moment I raised the latch of the door and peeped in at himopposite to it, sitting in the chimney corner.

"Mrs. Joe has been out a dozen times, looking for you, Pip.  Andshe's out now, making it a baker's dozen."

"Is she?"

"Yes, Pip," said Joe; "and what's worse, she's got Tickler withher."

At this dismal intelligence, I twisted the only button on mywaistcoat round and round, and looked in great depression at thefire.  Tickler was a wax-ended piece of cane, worn smooth bycollision with my tickled frame.

"She sot down," said Joe, "and she got up, and she made a grab atTickler, and she Ram-paged out.  That's what she did," said Joe,slowly clearing the fire between the lower bars with the poker, andlooking at it; "she Ram-paged out, Pip."

"Has she been gone long, Joe?"  I always treated him as a largerspecies of child, and as no more than my equal.

"Well," said Joe, glancing up at the Dutch clock, "she's been onthe Ram-page, this last spell, about five minutes, Pip.  She's acoming!  Get behind the door, old chap, and have the jack-towelbetwixt you."

I took the advice.  My sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing the door wide open,and finding an obstruction behind it, immediately divined thecause, and applied Tickler to its further investigation.  Sheconcluded by throwing me--I often served as a connubial missile--at Joe, who, glad to get hold of me on any terms, passed me on intothe chimney and quietly fenced me up there with his great leg.

"Where have you been, you young monkey?" said Mrs. Joe, stamping herfoot.  "Tell me directly what you've been doing to wear me away withfret and fright and worrit, or I'd have you out of that corner ifyou was fifty Pips, and he was five hundred Gargerys."

"I have only been to the churchyard," said I, from my stool, cryingand rubbing myself.

"Churchyard!" repeated my sister.  "If it warn't for me you'd havebeen to the churchyard long ago, and stayed there.  Who brought youup by hand?"

"You did," said I.

"And why did I do it, I should like to know?" exclaimed my sister.

I whimpered, "I don't know."

"I don't!" said my sister.  "I'd never do it again!  I know that.  Imay truly say I've never had this apron of mine off since born youwere.  It's bad enough to be a blacksmith's wife (and him a Gargery)without being your mother."

My thoughts strayed from that question as I looked disconsolatelyat the fire.  For the fugitive out on the marshes with the ironedleg, the mysterious young man, the file, the food, and the dreadfulpledge I was under to commit a larceny on those shelteringpremises, rose before me in the avenging coals.

"Hah!" said Mrs. Joe, restoring Tickler to his station.  "Churchyard,indeed!  You may well say churchyard, you two."  One of us,by the by, had not said it at all.  "You'll drive me to thechurchyard betwixt you, one of these days, and O, a pr-r-reciouspair you'd be without me!"

As she applied herself to set the tea-things, Joe peeped down at meover his leg, as if he were mentally casting me and himself up, andcalculating what kind of pair we practically should make, under thegrievous circumstances foreshadowed.  After that, he sat feeling hisright-side flaxen curls and whisker, and following Mrs. Joe aboutwith his blue eyes, as his manner always was at squally times.

My sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread and butter forus, that never varied.  First, with her left hand she jammed theloaf hard and fast against her bib,--where it sometimes got a pininto it, and sometimes a needle, which we afterwards got into ourmouths.  Then she took some butter (not too much) on a knife andspread it on the loaf, in an apothecary kind of way, as if she weremaking a plaster,--using both sides of the knife with a slappingdexterity, and trimming and moulding the butter off round thecrust.  Then, she gave the knife a final smart wipe on the edge ofthe plaster, and then sawed a very thick round off the loaf:  whichshe finally, before separating from the loaf, hewed into twohalves, of which Joe got one, and I the other.

On the present occasion, though I was hungry, I dared not eat myslice.  I felt that I must have something in reserve for my dreadfulacquaintance, and his ally the still more dreadful young man.  Iknew Mrs. Joe's housekeeping to be of the strictest kind, and thatmy larcenous researches might find nothing available in the safe.Therefore I resolved to put my hunk of bread and butter down theleg of my trousers.

The effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of thispurpose I found to be quite awful.  It was as if I had to make upmy mind to leap from the top of a high house, or plunge into agreat depth of water.  And it was made the more difficult by theunconscious Joe.  In our already-mentioned freemasonry asfellow-sufferers, and in his good-natured companionship with me, itwas our evening habit to compare the way we bit through our slices,by silently holding them up to each other's admiration now and then,--which stimulated us to new exertions.  To-night, Joe several timesinvited me, by the display of his fast diminishing slice, to enterupon our usual friendly competition; but he found me, each time,with my yellow mug of tea on one knee, and my untouchedbread and butter on the other.  At last, I desperately consideredthat the thing I contemplated must be done, and that it had best bedone in the least improbable manner consistent with thecircumstances.  I took advantage of a moment when Joe had justlooked at me, and got my bread and butter down my leg.

Joe was evidently made uncomfortable by what he supposed to be myloss of appetite, and took a thoughtful bite out of his slice,which he didn't seem to enjoy.  He turned it about in his mouth muchlonger than usual, pondering over it a good deal, and after allgulped it down like a pill.  He was about to take another bite, andhad just got his head on one side for a good purchase on it, whenhis eye fell on me, and he saw that my bread and butter was gone.

The wonder and consternation with which Joe stopped on thethreshold of his bite and stared at me, were too evident to escapemy sister's observation.

"What's the matter now?" said she, smartly, as she put down hercup.

"I say, you know!" muttered Joe, shaking his head at me in veryserious remonstrance.  "Pip, old chap!  You'll do yourself amischief.  It'll stick somewhere.  You can't have chawed it, Pip."

"What's the matter now?" repeated my sister, more sharply thanbefore.

"If you can cough any trifle on it up, Pip, I'd recommend you to doit," said Joe, all aghast.  "Manners is manners, but still yourelth's your elth."

By this time, my sister was quite desperate, so she pounced on Joe,and, taking him by the two whiskers, knocked his head for a littlewhile against the wall behind him, while I sat in the corner,looking guiltily on.

"Now, perhaps you'll mention what's the matter," said my sister,out of breath, "you staring great stuck pig."

Joe looked at her in a helpless way, then took a helpless bite, andlooked at me again.

"You know, Pip," said Joe, solemnly, with his last bite in hischeek, and speaking in a confidential voice, as if we two were quitealone, "you and me is always friends, and I'd be the last to tellupon you, any time.  But such a--" he moved his chair and lookedabout the floor between us, and then again at me--"such a mostoncommon Bolt as that!"

"Been bolting his food, has he?" cried my sister.

"You know, old chap," said Joe, looking at me, and not at Mrs. Joe,with his bite still in his cheek, "I Bolted, myself, when I wasyour age--frequent--and as a boy I've been among a many Bolters;but I never see your Bolting equal yet, Pip, and it's a mercy youain't Bolted dead."

My sister made a dive at me, and fished me up by the hair, sayingnothing more than the awful words, "You come along and be dosed."

Some medical beast had revived Tar-water in those days as a finemedicine, and Mrs. Joe always kept a supply of it in the cupboard;having a belief in its virtues correspondent to its nastiness.  Atthe best of times, so much of this elixir was administered to me asa choice restorative, that I was conscious of going about, smellinglike a new fence.  On this particular evening the urgency of my casedemanded a pint of this mixture, which was poured down my throat,for my greater comfort, while Mrs. Joe held my head under her arm,as a boot would be held in a bootjack.  Joe got off with half apint; but was made to swallow that (much to his disturbance, as hesat slowly munching and meditating before the fire), "because he hadhad a turn."  Judging from myself, I should say he certainly had aturn afterwards, if he had had none before.

Conscience is a dreadful thing when it accuses man or boy; butwhen, in the case of a boy, that secret burden co-operates withanother secret burden down the leg of his trousers, it is (as I cantestify) a great punishment.  The guilty knowledge that I was goingto rob Mrs. Joe--I never thought I was going to rob Joe, for Inever thought of any of the housekeeping property as his--unitedto the necessity of always keeping one hand on my bread and butteras I sat, or when I was ordered about the kitchen on any smallerrand, almost drove me out of my mind.  Then, as the marsh windsmade the fire glow and flare, I thought I heard the voice outside,of the man with the iron on his leg who had sworn me to secrecy,declaring that he couldn't and wouldn't starve until to-morrow, butmust be fed now.  At other times, I thought, What if the young manwho was with so much difficulty restrained from imbruing his handsin me should yield to a constitutional impatience, or shouldmistake the time, and should think himself accredited to my heartand liver to-night, instead of to-morrow!  If ever anybody's hairstood on end with terror, mine must have done so then.  But,perhaps, nobody's ever did?

It was Christmas Eve, and I had to stir the pudding for next day,with a copper-stick, from seven to eight by the Dutch clock.  Itried it with the load upon my leg (and that made me think afreshof the man with the load on his leg), and found the tendency ofexercise to bring the bread and butter out at my ankle, quiteunmanageable.  Happily I slipped away, and deposited that part ofmy conscience in my garret bedroom.

"Hark!" said I, when I had done my stirring, and was taking a finalwarm in the chimney corner before being sent up to bed; "was thatgreat guns, Joe?"

"Ah!" said Joe.  "There's another conwict off."

"What does that mean, Joe?" said I.

Mrs. Joe, who always took explanations upon herself, said,snappishly, "Escaped.  Escaped."  Administering the definition likeTar-water.

While Mrs. Joe sat with her head bending over her needlework, I putmy mouth into the forms of saying to Joe, "What's a convict?"  Joeput his mouth into the forms of returning such a highly elaborateanswer, that I could make out nothing of it but the single word"Pip."

"There was a conwict off last night," said Joe, aloud, "aftersunset-gun.  And they fired warning of him.  And now it appearsthey're firing warning of another."

"Who's firing?" said I.

"Drat that boy," interposed my sister, frowning at me over herwork, "what a questioner he is.  Ask no questions, and you'll betold no lies."

It was not very polite to herself, I thought, to imply that I shouldbe told lies by her even if I did ask questions.  But she never waspolite unless there was company.

At this point Joe greatly augmented my curiosity by taking theutmost pains to open his mouth very wide, and to put it into theform of a word that looked to me like "sulks."  Therefore, Inaturally pointed to Mrs. Joe, and put my mouth into the form ofsaying, "her?"  But Joe wouldn't hear of that, at all, and againopened his mouth very wide, and shook the form of a most emphaticword out of it.  But I could make nothing of the word.

"Mrs. Joe," said I, as a last resort, "I should like to know--ifyou wouldn't much mind--where the firing comes from?"

"Lord bless the boy!" exclaimed my sister, as if she didn't quitemean that but rather the contrary.  "From the Hulks!"

"Oh-h!" said I, looking at Joe.  "Hulks!"

Joe gave a reproachful cough, as much as to say, "Well, I told youso."

"And please, what's Hulks?" said I.

"That's the way with this boy!" exclaimed my sister, pointing meout with her needle and thread, and shaking her head at me.  "Answerhim one question, and he'll ask you a dozen directly.  Hulks areprison-ships, right 'cross th' meshes."  We always used that namefor marshes, in our country.

"I wonder who's put into prison-ships, and why they're put there?"said I, in a general way, and with quiet desperation.

It was too much for Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose.  "I tell youwhat, young fellow," said she, "I didn't bring you up by hand tobadger people's lives out.  It would be blame to me and not praise,if I had.  People are put in the Hulks because they murder, andbecause they rob, and forge, and do all sorts of bad; and theyalways begin by asking questions.  Now, you get along to bed!"

I was never allowed a candle to light me to bed, and, as I wentup stairs in the dark, with my head tingling,--from Mrs. Joe'sthimble having played the tambourine upon it, to accompany her lastwords,--I felt fearfully sensible of the great convenience that thehulks were handy for me.  I was clearly on my way there.  I had begunby asking questions, and I was going to rob Mrs. Joe.

Since that time, which is far enough away now, I have often thoughtthat few people know what secrecy there is in the young underterror.  No matter how unreasonable the terror, so that it beterror.  I was in mortal terror of the young man who wanted my heartand liver; I was in mortal terror of my interlocutor with theiron leg; I was in mortal terror of myself, from whom an awfulpromise had been extracted; I had no hope of deliverance through myall-powerful sister, who repulsed me at every turn; I am afraid tothink of what I might have done on requirement, in the secrecy ofmy terror.

If I slept at all that night, it was only to imagine myselfdrifting down the river on a strong spring-tide, to the Hulks; aghostly pirate calling out to me through a speaking-trumpet, as Ipassed the gibbet-station, that I had better come ashore and behanged there at once, and not put it off.  I was afraid to sleep,even if I had been inclined, for I knew that at the first faintdawn of morning I must rob the pantry.  There was no doing it in thenight, for there was no getting a light by easy friction then; tohave got one I must have struck it out of flint and steel, andhave made a noise like the very pirate himself rattling his chains.

As soon as the great black velvet pall outside my little window wasshot with gray, I got up and went down stairs; every board upon theway, and every crack in every board calling after me, "Stopthief!" and "Get up, Mrs. Joe!" In the pantry, which was far moreabundantly supplied than usual, owing to the season, I was verymuch alarmed by a hare hanging up by the heels, whom I ratherthought I caught when my back was half turned, winking.  I had notime for verification, no time for selection, no time for anything,for I had no time to spare.  I stole some bread, some rind ofcheese, about half a jar of mincemeat (which I tied up in mypocket-handkerchief with my last night's slice), some brandy from astone bottle (which I decanted into a glass bottle I had secretlyused for making that intoxicating fluid, Spanish-liquorice-water,up in my room:  diluting the stone bottle from a jug in the kitchencupboard), a meat bone with very little on it, and a beautifulround compact pork pie.  I was nearly going away without the pie,but I was tempted to mount upon a shelf, to look what it was thatwas put away so carefully in a covered earthen ware dish in acorner, and I found it was the pie, and I took it in the hope thatit was not intended for early use, and would not be missed for sometime.

There was a door in the kitchen, communicating with the forge; Iunlocked and unbolted that door, and got a file from among Joe'stools.  Then I put the fastenings as I had found them, opened thedoor at which I had entered when I ran home last night, shut it,and ran for the misty marshes.

Chapter III

It was a rimy morning, and very damp.  I had seen the damp lying onthe outside of my little window, as if some goblin had been cryingthere all night, and using the window for a pocket-handkerchief.Now, I saw the damp lying on the bare hedges and spare grass, likea coarser sort of spiders' webs; hanging itself from twig to twigand blade to blade.  On every rail and gate, wet lay clammy, and themarsh mist was so thick, that the wooden finger on the postdirecting people to our village--a direction which they neveraccepted, for they never came there--was invisible to me until Iwas quite close under it.  Then, as I looked up at it, while itdripped, it seemed to my oppressed conscience like a phantomdevoting me to the Hulks.

The mist was heavier yet when I got out upon the marshes, so thatinstead of my running at everything, everything seemed to run atme.  This was very disagreeable to a guilty mind.  The gates anddikes and banks came bursting at me through the mist, as if theycried as plainly as could be, "A boy with Somebody's else's pork pie!Stop him!"  The cattle came upon me with like suddenness, staringout of their eyes, and steaming out of their nostrils, "Halloa,young thief!"  One black ox, with a white cravat on,--who even hadto my awakened conscience something of a clerical air,--fixed me soobstinately with his eyes, and moved his blunt head round in suchan accusatory manner as I moved round, that I blubbered out to him,"I couldn't help it, sir!  It wasn't for myself I took it!"  Uponwhich he put down his head, blew a cloud of smoke out of his nose,and vanished with a kick-up of his hind-legs and a flourish of histail.

All this time, I was getting on towards the river; but however fastI went, I couldn't warm my feet, to which the damp cold seemedriveted, as the iron was riveted to the leg of the man I wasrunning to meet.  I knew my way to the Battery, pretty straight, forI had been down there on a Sunday with Joe, and Joe, sitting on anold gun, had told me that when I was 'prentice to him, regularlybound, we would have such Larks there!  However, in the confusion ofthe mist, I found myself at last too far to the right, andconsequently had to try back along the river-side, on the bank ofloose stones above the mud and the stakes that staked the tide out.Making my way along here with all despatch, I had just crossed aditch which I knew to be very near the Battery, and had justscrambled up the mound beyond the ditch, when I saw the man sittingbefore me.  His back was towards me, and he had his arms folded, andwas nodding forward, heavy with sleep.

I thought he would be more glad if I came upon him with hisbreakfast, in that unexpected manner, so I went forward softly andtouched him on the shoulder.  He instantly jumped up, and it was notthe same man, but another man!

And yet this man was dressed in coarse gray, too, and had a greatiron on his leg, and was lame, and hoarse, and cold, and waseverything that the other man was; except that he had not the sameface, and had a flat broad-brimmed low-crowned felt that on.  Allthis I saw in a moment, for I had only a moment to see it in:  heswore an oath at me, made a hit at me,--it was a round weak blowthat missed me and almost knocked himself down, for it made himstumble,--and then he ran into the mist, stumbling twice as he went,and I lost him.

"It's the young man!" I thought, feeling my heart shoot as Iidentified him.  I dare say I should have felt a pain in my liver,too, if I had known where it was.

I was soon at the Battery after that, and there was the rightMan,--hugging himself and limping to and fro, as if he had never allnight left off hugging and limping,--waiting for me.  He was awfullycold, to be sure.  I half expected to see him drop down before myface and die of deadly cold.  His eyes looked so awfully hungrytoo, that when I handed him the file and he laid it down on thegrass, it occurred to me he would have tried to eat it, if he hadnot seen my bundle.  He did not turn me upside down this time toget at what I had, but left me right side upwards while I openedthe bundle and emptied my pockets.

"What's in the bottle, boy?" said he.

"Brandy," said I.

He was already handing mincemeat down his throat in the mostcurious manner,--more like a man who was putting it away somewherein a violent hurry, than a man who was eating it,--but he left offto take some of the liquor.  He shivered all the while soviolently, that it was quite as much as he could do to keep theneck of the bottle between his teeth, without biting it off.

"I think you have got the ague," said I.

"I'm much of your opinion, boy," said he.

"It's bad about here," I told him.  "You've been lying out on themeshes, and they're dreadful aguish.  Rheumatic too."

"I'll eat my breakfast afore they're the death of me," said he."I'd do that, if I was going to be strung up to that there gallowsas there is over there, directly afterwards.  I'll beat the shiversso far, I'll bet you."

He was gobbling mincemeat, meatbone, bread, cheese, and pork pie,all at once:  staring distrustfully while he did so at the mist allround us, and often stopping--even stopping his jaws--to listen.Some real or fancied sound, some clink upon the river or breathingof beast upon the marsh, now gave him a start, and he said,suddenly,--

"You're not a deceiving imp?  You brought no one with you?"

"No, sir!  No!"

"Nor giv' no one the office to follow you?"

"No!"

"Well," said he, "I believe you.  You'd be but a fierce young houndindeed, if at your time of life you could help to hunt a wretchedwarmint hunted as near death and dunghill as this poor wretchedwarmint is!"

Something clicked in his throat as if he had works in him like aclock, and was going to strike.  And he smeared his ragged roughsleeve over his eyes.

Pitying his desolation, and watching him as he gradually settleddown upon the pie, I made bold to say, "I am glad you enjoy it."

"Did you speak?"

"I said I was glad you enjoyed it."

"Thankee, my boy.  I do."

I had often watched a large dog of ours eating his food; and I nownoticed a decided similarity between the dog's way of eating, andthe man's.  The man took strong sharp sudden bites, just like thedog.  He swallowed, or rather snapped up, every mouthful, too soonand too fast; and he looked sideways here and there while he ate,as if he thought there was danger in every direction of somebody'scoming to take the pie away.  He was altogether too unsettled in hismind over it, to appreciate it comfortably I thought, or to haveanybody to dine with him, without making a chop with his jaws atthe visitor.  In all of which particulars he was very like the dog.

"I am afraid you won't leave any of it for him," said I, timidly;after a silence during which I had hesitated as to the politenessof making the remark.  "There's no more to be got where that camefrom."  It was the certainty of this fact that impelled me to offerthe hint.

"Leave any for him?  Who's him?" said my friend, stopping in hiscrunching of pie-crust.

"The young man.  That you spoke of.  That was hid with you."

"Oh ah!" he returned, with something like a gruff laugh.  "Him?  Yes,yes!  He don't want no wittles."

"I thought he looked as if he did," said I.

The man stopped eating, and regarded me with the keenest scrutinyand the greatest surprise.

"Looked?  When?"

"Just now."

"Where?"

"Yonder," said I, pointing; "over there, where I found him noddingasleep, and thought it was you."

He held me by the collar and stared at me so, that I began to thinkhis first idea about cutting my throat had revived.

"Dressed like you, you know, only with a hat," I explained,trembling; "and--and"--I was very anxious to put this delicately--"and with--the same reason for wanting to borrow a file.  Didn'tyou hear the cannon last night?"

"Then there was firing!" he said to himself.

"I wonder you shouldn't have been sure of that," I returned, "forwe heard it up at home, and that's farther away, and we were shutin besides."

"Why, see now!" said he.  "When a man's alone on these flats, with alight head and a light stomach, perishing of cold and want, hehears nothin' all night, but guns firing, and voices calling.Hears?  He sees the soldiers, with their red coats lighted up by thetorches carried afore, closing in round him.  Hears his numbercalled, hears himself challenged, hears the rattle of the muskets,hears the orders 'Make ready!  Present!  Cover him steady, men!' andis laid hands on--and there's nothin'!  Why, if I see one pursuingparty last night--coming up in order, Damn 'em, with their tramp,tramp--I see a hundred.  And as to firing!  Why, I see the mistshake with the cannon, arter it was broad day,--But this man"; hehad said all the rest, as if he had forgotten my being there; "didyou notice anything in him?"

"He had a badly bruised face," said I, recalling what I hardly knewI knew.

"Not here?" exclaimed the man, striking his left cheek mercilessly,with the flat of his hand.

"Yes, there!"

"Where is he?"  He crammed what little food was left, into thebreast of his gray jacket.  "Show me the way he went.  I'll pull himdown, like a bloodhound.  Curse this iron on my sore leg!  Give ushold of the file, boy."

I indicated in what direction the mist had shrouded the other man,and he looked up at it for an instant.  But he was down on the rankwet grass, filing at his iron like a madman, and not minding me orminding his own leg, which had an old chafe upon it and was bloody,but which he handled as roughly as if it had no more feeling in itthan the file.  I was very much afraid of him again, now that he hadworked himself into this fierce hurry, and I was likewise very muchafraid of keeping away from home any longer.  I told him I must go,but he took no notice, so I thought the best thing I could do wasto slip off.  The last I saw of him, his head was bent over his kneeand he was working hard at his fetter, muttering impatientimprecations at it and at his leg.  The last I heard of him, Istopped in the mist to listen, and the file was still going.

Chapter IV

I fully expected to find a Constable in the kitchen, waiting totake me up.  But not only was there no Constable there, but nodiscovery had yet been made of the robbery.  Mrs. Joe wasprodigiously busy in getting the house ready for the festivities ofthe day, and Joe had been put upon the kitchen doorstep to keephim out of the dust-pan,--an article into which his destiny alwaysled him, sooner or later, when my sister was vigorously reaping thefloors of her establishment.

"And where the deuce ha' you been?" was Mrs. Joe's Christmassalutation, when I and my conscience showed ourselves.

I said I had been down to hear the Carols.  "Ah! well!" observed Mrs.Joe.  "You might ha' done worse."  Not a doubt of that I thought.

"Perhaps if I warn't a blacksmith's wife, and (what's the samething) a slave with her apron never off, I should have been to hearthe Carols," said Mrs. Joe.  "I'm rather partial to Carols, myself,and that's the best of reasons for my never hearing any."

Joe, who had ventured into the kitchen after me as the dustpan hadretired before us, drew the back of his hand across his nose with aconciliatory air, when Mrs. Joe darted a look at him, and, when hereyes were withdrawn, secretly crossed his two forefingers, andexhibited them to me, as our token that Mrs. Joe was in a crosstemper.  This was so much her normal state, that Joe and I wouldoften, for weeks together, be, as to our fingers, like monumentalCrusaders as to their legs.

We were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of pickledpork and greens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls.  A handsomemince-pie had been made yesterday morning (which accounted for themincemeat not being missed), and the pudding was already on theboil.  These extensive arrangements occasioned us to be cut offunceremoniously in respect of breakfast; "for I ain't," said Mrs.Joe,--"I ain't a going to have no formal cramming and busting andwashing up now, with what I've got before me, I promise you!"

So, we had our slices served out, as if we were two thousand troopson a forced march instead of a man and boy at home; and we tookgulps of milk and water, with apologetic countenances, from a jugon the dresser.  In the meantime, Mrs. Joe put clean white curtainsup, and tacked a new flowered flounce across the wide chimney toreplace the old one, and uncovered the little state parlor acrossthe passage, which was never uncovered at any other time, butpassed the rest of the year in a cool haze of silver paper, whicheven extended to the four little white crockery poodles on themantel-shelf, each with a black nose and a basket of flowers in hismouth, and each the counterpart of the other.  Mrs. Joe was a veryclean housekeeper, but had an exquisite art of making hercleanliness more uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself.Cleanliness is next to Godliness, and some people do the same bytheir religion.

My sister, having so much to do, was going to church vicariously,that is to say, Joe and I were going.  In his working--clothes, Joewas a well-knit characteristic-looking blacksmith; in his holidayclothes, he was more like a scarecrow in good circumstances, thananything else.  Nothing that he wore then fitted him or seemed tobelong to him; and everything that he wore then grazed him.  On thepresent festive occasion he emerged from his room, when the blithebells were going, the picture of misery, in a full suit of Sundaypenitentials.  As to me, I think my sister must have had somegeneral idea that I was a young offender whom an AccoucheurPoliceman had taken up (on my birthday) and delivered over to her,to be dealt with according to the outraged majesty of the law.  Iwas always treated as if I had insisted on being born inopposition to the dictates of reason, religion, and morality, andagainst the dissuading arguments of my best friends.  Even when Iwas taken to have a new suit of clothes, the tailor had orders tomake them like a kind of Reformatory, and on no account to let mehave the free use of my limbs.

Joe and I going to church, therefore, must have been a movingspectacle for compassionate minds.  Yet, what I suffered outsidewas nothing to what I underwent within.  The terrors that hadassailed me whenever Mrs. Joe had gone near the pantry, or out ofthe room, were only to be equalled by the remorse with which mymind dwelt on what my hands had done.  Under the weight of my wickedsecret, I pondered whether the Church would be powerful enough toshield me from the vengeance of the terrible young man, if Idivulged to that establishment.  I conceived the idea that the timewhen the banns were read and when the clergyman said, "Ye are nowto declare it!" would be the time for me to rise and propose aprivate conference in the vestry.  I am far from being sure that Imight not have astonished our small congregation by resorting tothis extreme measure, but for its being Christmas Day and noSunday.

Mr. Wopsle, the clerk at church, was to dine with us; and Mr. Hubblethe wheelwright and Mrs. Hubble; and Uncle Pumblechook (Joe's uncle,but Mrs. Joe appropriated him), who was a well-to-do cornchandlerin the nearest town, and drove his own chaise-cart.  The dinner hourwas half-past one.  When Joe and I got home, we found the tablelaid, and Mrs. Joe dressed, and the dinner dressing, and the frontdoor unlocked (it never was at any other time) for the company toenter by, and everything most splendid.  And still, not a word ofthe robbery.

The time came, without bringing with it any relief to my feelings,and the company came.  Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and alarge shining bald forehead, had a deep voice which he wasuncommonly proud of; indeed it was understood among hisacquaintance that if you could only give him his head, he wouldread the clergyman into fits; he himself confessed that if theChurch was "thrown open," meaning to competition, he would notdespair of making his mark in it.  The Church not being "thrownopen," he was, as I have said, our clerk.  But he punished theAmens tremendously; and when he gave out the psalm,--always givingthe whole verse,--he looked all round the congregation first, asmuch as to say, "You have heard my friend overhead; oblige me withyour opinion of this style!"

I opened the door to the company,--making believe that it was ahabit of ours to open that door,--and I opened it first to Mr.Wopsle, next to Mr. and Mrs. Hubble, and last of all to UnclePumblechook.  N.B. I was not allowed to call him uncle, under theseverest penalties.

"Mrs. Joe," said Uncle Pumblechook, a large hard-breathingmiddle-aged slow man, with a mouth like a fish, dull staring eyes,and sandy hair standing upright on his head, so that he looked asif he had just been all but choked, and had that moment come to,"I have brought you as the compliments of the season--I havebrought you, Mum, a bottle of sherry wine--and I have brought you,Mum, a bottle of port wine."

Every Christmas Day he presented himself, as a profound novelty,with exactly the same words, and carrying the two bottles likedumb-bells.  Every Christmas Day, Mrs. Joe replied, as she nowreplied, "O, Un--cle Pum-ble--chook!  This is kind!"  EveryChristmas Day, he retorted, as he now retorted, "It's no more thanyour merits.  And now are you all bobbish, and how's Sixpennorth ofhalfpence?" meaning me.

We dined on these occasions in the kitchen, and adjourned, for thenuts and oranges and apples to the parlor; which was a changevery like Joe's change from his working-clothes to his Sundaydress.  My sister was uncommonly lively on the present occasion, andindeed was generally more gracious in the society of Mrs. Hubblethan in other company.  I remember Mrs. Hubble as a little curlysharp-edged person in sky-blue, who held a conventionally juvenileposition, because she had married Mr. Hubble,--I don't know at whatremote period,--when she was much younger than he.  I remember MrHubble as a tough, high-shouldered, stooping old man, of a sawdustyfragrance, with his legs extraordinarily wide apart:  so that in myshort days I always saw some miles of open country between themwhen I met him coming up the lane.

Among this good company I should have felt myself, even if I hadn'trobbed the pantry, in a false position.  Not because I was squeezedin at an acute angle of the tablecloth, with the table in mychest, and the Pumblechookian elbow in my eye, nor because I wasnot allowed to speak (I didn't want to speak), nor because I wasregaled with the scaly tips of the drumsticks of the fowls, andwith those obscure corners of pork of which the pig, when living,had had the least reason to be vain.  No; I should not have mindedthat, if they would only have left me alone.  But they wouldn'tleave me alone.  They seemed to think the opportunity lost, if theyfailed to point the conversation at me, every now and then, andstick the point into me.  I might have been an unfortunate littlebull in a Spanish arena, I got so smartingly touched up by thesemoral goads.

It began the moment we sat down to dinner.  Mr. Wopsle said gracewith theatrical declamation,--as it now appears to me, somethinglike a religious cross of the Ghost in Hamlet with Richard theThird,--and ended with the very proper aspiration that we might betruly grateful.  Upon which my sister fixed me with her eye, andsaid, in a low reproachful voice, "Do you hear that?  Be grateful."

"Especially," said Mr. Pumblechook, "be grateful, boy, to them whichbrought you up by hand."

Mrs. Hubble shook her head, and contemplating me with a mournfulpresentiment that I should come to no good, asked, "Why is it thatthe young are never grateful?"  This moral mystery seemed too muchfor the company until Mr. Hubble tersely solved it by saying,"Naterally wicious."  Everybody then murmured "True!" and looked atme in a particularly unpleasant and personal manner.

Joe's station and influence were something feebler (if possible)when there was company than when there was none.  But he alwaysaided and comforted me when he could, in some way of his own, andhe always did so at dinner-time by giving me gravy, if there wereany.  There being plenty of gravy to-day, Joe spooned into my plate,at this point, about half a pint.

A little later on in the dinner, Mr. Wopsle reviewed the sermon withsome severity, and intimated--in the usual hypothetical case ofthe Church being "thrown open"--what kind of sermon he would havegiven them.  After favoring them with some heads of that discourse,he remarked that he considered the subject of the day's homily,ill chosen; which was the less excusable, he added, when there wereso many subjects "going about."

"True again," said Uncle Pumblechook.  "You've hit it, sir!  Plenty ofsubjects going about, for them that know how to put salt upon theirtails.  That's what's wanted.  A man needn't go far to find asubject, if he's ready with his salt-box."  Mr. Pumblechook added,after a short interval of reflection, "Look at Pork alone.  There'sa subject!  If you want a subject, look at Pork!"

"True, sir.  Many a moral for the young," returned Mr. Wopsle,--and Iknew he was going to lug me in, before he said it; "might bededuced from that text."

("You listen to this," said my sister to me, in a severeparenthesis.)

Joe gave me some more gravy.

"Swine," pursued Mr. Wopsle, in his deepest voice, and pointing hisfork at my blushes, as if he were mentioning my Christian name,--"swine were the companions of the prodigal.  The gluttony of Swineis put before us, as an example to the young."  (I thought thispretty well in him who had been praising up the pork for being soplump and juicy.)  "What is detestable in a pig is more detestablein a boy."

"Or girl," suggested Mr. Hubble.

"Of course, or girl, Mr. Hubble," assented Mr. Wopsle, ratherirritably, "but there is no girl present."

"Besides," said Mr. Pumblechook, turning sharp on me, "think whatyou've got to be grateful for.  If you'd been born a Squeaker--"

"He was, if ever a child was," said my sister, most emphatically.

Joe gave me some more gravy.

"Well, but I mean a four-footed Squeaker," said Mr. Pumblechook.  "Ifyou had been born such, would you have been here now?  Not you--"

"Unless in that form," said Mr. Wopsle, nodding towards the dish.

"But I don't mean in that form, sir," returned Mr. Pumblechook, whohad an objection to being interrupted; "I mean, enjoying himselfwith his elders and betters, and improving himself with theirconversation, and rolling in the lap of luxury.  Would he have beendoing that?  No, he wouldn't.  And what would have been yourdestination?" turning on me again.  "You would have been disposed offor so many shillings according to the market price of the article,and Dunstable the butcher would have come up to you as you lay inyour straw, and he would have whipped you under his left arm, andwith his right he would have tucked up his frock to get a penknifefrom out of his waistcoat-pocket, and he would have shed yourblood and had your life.  No bringing up by hand then.  Not a bit ofit!"

Joe offered me more gravy, which I was afraid to take.

"He was a world of trouble to you, ma'am," said Mrs. Hubble,commiserating my sister.

"Trouble?" echoed my sister; "trouble?" and then entered on afearful catalogue of all the illnesses I had been guilty of, andall the acts of sleeplessness I had committed, and all the highplaces I had tumbled from, and all the low places I had tumbledinto, and all the injuries I had done myself, and all the times shehad wished me in my grave, and I had contumaciously refused to gothere.

I think the Romans must have aggravated one another very much, withtheir noses.  Perhaps, they became the restless people they were, inconsequence.  Anyhow, Mr. Wopsle's Roman nose so aggravated me,during the recital of my misdemeanours, that I should have liked topull it until he howled.  But, all I had endured up to this timewas nothing in comparison with the awful feelings that tookpossession of me when the pause was broken which ensued upon mysister's recital, and in which pause everybody had looked at me (asI felt painfully conscious) with indignation and abhorrence.

"Yet," said Mr. Pumblechook, leading the company gently back to thetheme from which they had strayed, "Pork--regarded as biled --isrich, too; ain't it?"

"Have a little brandy, uncle," said my sister.

O Heavens, it had come at last!  He would find it was weak, he wouldsay it was weak, and I was lost!  I held tight to the leg of thetable under the cloth, with both hands, and awaited my fate.

My sister went for the stone bottle, came back with the stonebottle, and poured his brandy out:  no one else taking any.  Thewretched man trifled with his glass,--took it up, looked at itthrough the light, put it down,--prolonged my misery.  All thistime Mrs. Joe and Joe were briskly clearing the table for the pieand pudding.

I couldn't keep my eyes off him.  Always holding tight by the leg ofthe table with my hands and feet, I saw the miserable creaturefinger his glass playfully, take it up, smile, throw his head back,and drink the brandy off.  Instantly afterwards, the company wereseized with unspeakable consternation, owing to his springing tohis feet, turning round several times in an appalling spasmodicwhooping-cough dance, and rushing out at the door; he then becamevisible through the window, violently plunging and expectorating,making the most hideous faces, and apparently out of his mind.

I held on tight, while Mrs. Joe and Joe ran to him.  I didn't knowhow I had done it, but I had no doubt I had murdered him somehow.In my dreadful situation, it was a relief when he was brought back,and surveying the company all round as if they had disagreed withhim, sank down into his chair with the one significant gasp, "Tar!"

I had filled up the bottle from the tar-water jug.  I knew he wouldbe worse by and by.  I moved the table, like a Medium of the presentday, by the vigor of my unseen hold upon it.

"Tar!" cried my sister, in amazement.  "Why, how ever could Tar comethere?"

But, Uncle Pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that kitchen,wouldn't hear the word, wouldn't hear of the subject, imperiouslywaved it all away with his hand, and asked for hot gin and water.My sister, who had begun to be alarmingly meditative, had to employherself actively in getting the gin the hot water, the sugar, andthe lemon-peel, and mixing them.  For the time being at least, I wassaved.  I still held on to the leg of the table, but clutched it nowwith the fervor of gratitude.

By degrees, I became calm enough to release my grasp and partake ofpudding.  Mr. Pumblechook partook of pudding.  All partook of pudding.The course terminated, and Mr. Pumblechook had begun to beam underthe genial influence of gin and water.  I began to think I shouldget over the day, when my sister said to Joe, "Clean plates,--cold."

I clutched the leg of the table again immediately, and pressed itto my bosom as if it had been the companion of my youth and friendof my soul.  I foresaw what was coming, and I felt that this time Ireally was gone.

"You must taste," said my sister, addressing the guests with herbest grace--"you must taste, to finish with, such a delightful anddelicious present of Uncle Pumblechook's!"

Must they!  Let them not hope to taste it!

"You must know," said my sister, rising, "it's a pie; a savorypork pie."

The company murmured their compliments.  Uncle Pumblechook, sensibleof having deserved well of his fellow-creatures, said,--quitevivaciously, all things considered,--"Well, Mrs. Joe, we'll do ourbest endeavors; let us have a cut at this same pie."

My sister went out to get it.  I heard her steps proceed to thepantry.  I saw Mr. Pumblechook balance his knife.  I saw reawakeningappetite in the Roman nostrils of Mr. Wopsle.  I heard Mr. Hubbleremark that "a bit of savory pork pie would lay atop of anythingyou could mention, and do no harm," and I heard Joe say, "You shallhave some, Pip."  I have never been absolutely certain whether Iuttered a shrill yell of terror, merely in spirit, or in the bodilyhearing of the company.  I felt that I could bear no more, and thatI must run away.  I released the leg of the table, and ran for mylife.

But I ran no farther than the house door, for there I ran head-foremost into a party of soldiers with their muskets, one of whomheld out a pair of handcuffs to me, saying, "Here you are, looksharp, come on!"

Chapter V

The apparition of a file of soldiers ringing down the but-ends oftheir loaded muskets on our door-step, caused the dinner-party torise from table in confusion, and caused Mrs. Joe re-entering thekitchen empty-handed, to stop short and stare, in her wonderinglament of "Gracious goodness gracious me, what's gone--with the--pie!"

The sergeant and I were in the kitchen when Mrs. Joe stood staring;at which crisis I partially recovered the use of my senses.  It wasthe sergeant who had spoken to me, and he was now looking round atthe company, with his handcuffs invitingly extended towards them inhis right hand, and his left on my shoulder.

"Excuse me, ladies and gentleman," said the sergeant, "but as Ihave mentioned at the door to this smart young shaver," (which hehadn't), "I am on a chase in the name of the king, and I want theblacksmith."

"And pray what might you want with him?" retorted my sister, quickto resent his being wanted at all.

"Missis," returned the gallant sergeant, "speaking for myself, Ishould reply, the honor and pleasure of his fine wife'sacquaintance; speaking for the king, I answer, a little job done."

This was received as rather neat in the sergeant; insomuch that Mr.Pumblechook cried audibly, "Good again!"

"You see, blacksmith," said the sergeant, who had by this timepicked out Joe with his eye, "we have had an accident with these,and I find the lock of one of 'em goes wrong, and the couplingdon't act pretty.  As they are wanted for immediate service, willyou throw your eye over them?"

Joe threw his eye over them, and pronounced that the job wouldnecessitate the lighting of his forge fire, and would take nearertwo hours than one, "Will it?  Then will you set about it at once,blacksmith?" said the off-hand sergeant, "as it's on his Majesty'sservice.  And if my men can bear a hand anywhere, they'll makethemselves useful."  With that, he called to his men, who cametrooping into the kitchen one after another, and piled their armsin a corner.  And then they stood about, as soldiers do; now, withtheir hands loosely clasped before them; now, resting a knee or ashoulder; now, easing a belt or a pouch; now, opening the door tospit stiffly over their high stocks, out into the yard.

All these things I saw without then knowing that I saw them, for Iwas in an agony of apprehension.  But beginning to perceive thatthe handcuffs were not for me, and that the military had so far gotthe better of the pie as to put it in the background, I collected alittle more of my scattered wits.

"Would you give me the time?" said the sergeant, addressing himselfto Mr. Pumblechook, as to a man whose appreciative powers justifiedthe inference that he was equal to the time.

"It's just gone half past two."

"That's not so bad," said the sergeant, reflecting; "even if I wasforced to halt here nigh two hours, that'll do.  How far might youcall yourselves from the marshes, hereabouts?  Not above a mile, Ireckon?"

"Just a mile," said Mrs. Joe.

"That'll do.  We begin to close in upon 'em about dusk.  A littlebefore dusk, my orders are.  That'll do."

"Convicts, sergeant?" asked Mr. Wopsle, in a matter-of-course way.

"Ay!" returned the sergeant, "two.  They're pretty well known to beout on the marshes still, and they won't try to get clear of 'embefore dusk.  Anybody here seen anything of any such game?"

Everybody, myself excepted, said no, with confidence.  Nobodythought of me.

"Well!" said the sergeant, "they'll find themselves trapped in acircle, I expect, sooner than they count on.  Now, blacksmith!  Ifyou're ready, his Majesty the King is."

Joe had got his coat and waistcoat and cravat off, and his leatherapron on, and passed into the forge.  One of the soldiers opened itswooden windows, another lighted the fire, another turned to atthe bellows, the rest stood round the blaze, which was soonroaring.  Then Joe began to hammer and clink, hammer and clink, andwe all looked on.

The interest of the impending pursuit not only absorbed the generalattention, but even made my sister liberal.  She drew a pitcher ofbeer from the cask for the soldiers, and invited the sergeant totake a glass of brandy.  But Mr. Pumblechook said, sharply, "Give himwine, Mum.  I'll engage there's no Tar in that:"  so, the sergeantthanked him and said that as he preferred his drink without tar, hewould take wine, if it was equally convenient.  When it was givenhim, he drank his Majesty's health and compliments of the season,and took it all at a mouthful and smacked his lips.

"Good stuff, eh, sergeant?" said Mr. Pumblechook.

"I'll tell you something," returned the sergeant; "I suspect thatstuff's of your providing."

Mr. Pumblechook, with a fat sort of laugh, said, "Ay, ay?  Why?"

"Because," returned the sergeant, clapping him on the shoulder,"you're a man that knows what's what."

"D'ye think so?" said Mr. Pumblechook, with his former laugh.  "Haveanother glass!"

"With you.  Hob and nob," returned the sergeant.  "The top of mine tothe foot of yours,--the foot of yours to the top of mine,--Ringonce, ring twice,--the best tune on the Musical Glasses!  Yourhealth.  May you live a thousand years, and never be a worse judgeof the right sort than you are at the present moment of your life!"

The sergeant tossed off his glass again and seemed quite ready foranother glass.  I noticed that Mr. Pumblechook in his hospitalityappeared to forget that he had made a present of the wine, but tookthe bottle from Mrs. Joe and had all the credit of handing it aboutin a gush of joviality.  Even I got some.  And he was so very free ofthe wine that he even called for the other bottle, and handed thatabout with the same liberality, when the first was gone.

As I watched them while they all stood clustering about the forge,enjoying themselves so much, I thought what terrible good sauce fora dinner my fugitive friend on the marshes was.  They had notenjoyed themselves a quarter so much, before the entertainment wasbrightened with the excitement he furnished.  And now, when theywere all in lively anticipation of "the two villains" being taken,and when the bellows seemed to roar for the fugitives, the fire toflare for them, the smoke to hurry away in pursuit of them, Joe tohammer and clink for them, and all the murky shadows on the wall toshake at them in menace as the blaze rose and sank, and the red-hotsparks dropped and died, the pale afternoon outside almost seemedin my pitying young fancy to have turned pale on their account,poor wretches.

At last, Joe's job was done, and the ringing and roaring stopped.As Joe got on his coat, he mustered courage to propose that some ofus should go down with the soldiers and see what came of the hunt.Mr. Pumblechook and Mr. Hubble declined, on the plea of a pipe andladies' society; but Mr. Wopsle said he would go, if Joe would.  Joesaid he was agreeable, and would take me, if Mrs. Joe approved.  Wenever should have got leave to go, I am sure, but for Mrs. Joe'scuriosity to know all about it and how it ended.  As it was, shemerely stipulated, "If you bring the boy back with his head blownto bits by a musket, don't look to me to put it together again."

The sergeant took a polite leave of the ladies, and parted from Mr.Pumblechook as from a comrade; though I doubt if he were quite asfully sensible of that gentleman's merits under arid conditions, aswhen something moist was going.  His men resumed their muskets andfell in.  Mr. Wopsle, Joe, and I, received strict charge to keep inthe rear, and to speak no word after we reached the marshes.  Whenwe were all out in the raw air and were steadily moving towards ourbusiness, I treasonably whispered to Joe, "I hope, Joe, we shan'tfind them." and Joe whispered to me, "I'd give a shilling if theyhad cut and run, Pip."

We were joined by no stragglers from the village, for the weatherwas cold and threatening, the way dreary, the footing bad, darknesscoming on, and the people had good fires in-doors and were keepingthe day.  A few faces hurried to glowing windows and looked afterus, but none came out.  We passed the finger-post, and held straighton to the churchyard.  There we were stopped a few minutes by asignal from the sergeant's hand, while two or three of his mendispersed themselves among the graves, and also examined the porch.They came in again without finding anything, and then we struck outon the open marshes, through the gate at the side of thechurchyard.  A bitter sleet came rattling against us here on theeast wind, and Joe took me on his back.

Now that we were out upon the dismal wilderness where they littlethought I had been within eight or nine hours and had seen both menhiding, I considered for the first time, with great dread, if weshould come upon them, would my particular convict suppose that itwas I who had brought the soldiers there?  He had asked me if I wasa deceiving imp, and he had said I should be a fierce young houndif I joined the hunt against him.  Would he believe that I was bothimp and hound in treacherous earnest, and had betrayed him?

It was of no use asking myself this question now.  There I was, onJoe's back, and there was Joe beneath me, charging at the ditcheslike a hunter, and stimulating Mr. Wopsle not to tumble on his Romannose, and to keep up with us.  The soldiers were in front of us,extending into a pretty wide line with an interval between man andman.  We were taking the course I had begun with, and from which Ihad diverged in the mist.  Either the mist was not out again yet, orthe wind had dispelled it.  Under the low red glare of sunset, thebeacon, and the gibbet, and the mound of the Battery, and theopposite shore of the river, were plain, though all of a waterylead color.

With my heart thumping like a blacksmith at Joe's broad shoulder, Ilooked all about for any sign of the convicts.  I could see none, Icould hear none.  Mr. Wopsle had greatly alarmed me more than once,by his blowing and hard breathing; but I knew the sounds by thistime, and could dissociate them from the object of pursuit.  I got adreadful start, when I thought I heard the file still going; but itwas only a sheep-bell.  The sheep stopped in their eating and lookedtimidly at us; and the cattle, their heads turned from the wind andsleet, stared angrily as if they held us responsible for bothannoyances; but, except these things, and the shudder of the dyingday in every blade of grass, there was no break in the bleakstillness of the marshes.

The soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old Battery,and we were moving on a little way behind them, when, all of asudden, we all stopped.  For there had reached us on the wings ofthe wind and rain, a long shout.  It was repeated.  It was at adistance towards the east, but it was long and loud.  Nay, thereseemed to be two or more shouts raised together,--if one mightjudge from a confusion in the sound.

To this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking undertheir breath, when Joe and I came up.  After another moment'slistening, Joe (who was a good judge) agreed, and Mr. Wopsle (whowas a bad judge) agreed.  The sergeant, a decisive man, ordered thatthe sound should not be answered, but that the course should bechanged, and that his men should make towards it "at the double."So we slanted to the right (where the East was), and Joe poundedaway so wonderfully, that I had to hold on tight to keep my seat.

It was a run indeed now, and what Joe called, in the only two wordshe spoke all the time, "a Winder."  Down banks and up banks, andover gates, and splashing into dikes, and breaking among coarserushes:  no man cared where he went.  As we came nearer to theshouting, it became more and more apparent that it was made by morethan one voice.  Sometimes, it seemed to stop altogether, and thenthe soldiers stopped.  When it broke out again, the soldiers madefor it at a greater rate than ever, and we after them.  After awhile, we had so run it down, that we could hear one voice calling"Murder!" and another voice, "Convicts!  Runaways!  Guard!  This wayfor the runaway convicts!"  Then both voices would seem to bestifled in a struggle, and then would break out again.  And when ithad come to this, the soldiers ran like deer, and Joe too.

The sergeant ran in first, when we had run the noise quite down,and two of his men ran in close upon him.  Their pieces were cockedand levelled when we all ran in.

"Here are both men!" panted the sergeant, struggling at the bottomof a ditch.  "Surrender, you two! and confound you for two wildbeasts!  Come asunder!"

Water was splashing, and mud was flying, and oaths were beingsworn, and blows were being struck, when some more men went downinto the ditch to help the sergeant, and dragged out, separately,my convict and the other one.  Both were bleeding and panting andexecrating and struggling; but of course I knew them both directly.

"Mind!" said my convict, wiping blood from his face with his raggedsleeves, and shaking torn hair from his fingers:  "I took him!  I givehim up to you!  Mind that!"

"It's not much to be particular about," said the sergeant; "it'll doyou small good, my man, being in the same plight yourself.Handcuffs there!"

"I don't expect it to do me any good.  I don't want it to do me moregood than it does now," said my convict, with a greedy laugh.  "Itook him.  He knows it.  That's enough for me."

The other convict was livid to look at, and, in addition to the oldbruised left side of his face, seemed to be bruised and torn allover.  He could not so much as get his breath to speak, until theywere both separately handcuffed, but leaned upon a soldier to keephimself from falling.

"Take notice, guard,--he tried to murder me," were his first words.

"Tried to murder him?" said my convict, disdainfully.  "Try, and notdo it?  I took him, and giv' him up; that's what I done.  I not onlyprevented him getting off the marshes, but I dragged him here,--dragged him this far on his way back.  He's a gentleman, if youplease, this villain.  Now, the Hulks has got its gentleman again,through me.  Murder him?  Worth my while, too, to murder him, when Icould do worse and drag him back!"

The other one still gasped, "He tried--he tried-to--murder me.Bear--bear witness."

"Lookee here!" said my convict to the sergeant.  "Single-handed Igot clear of the prison-ship; I made a dash and I done it.  I couldha' got clear of these death-cold flats likewise --look at my leg:you won't find much iron on it--if I hadn't made the discovery thathe was here.  Let him go free?  Let him profit by the means as I foundout?  Let him make a tool of me afresh and again?  Once more?  No, no,no.  If I had died at the bottom there," and he made an emphaticswing at the ditch with his manacled hands, "I'd have held to himwith that grip, that you should have been safe to find him in myhold."

The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of hiscompanion, repeated, "He tried to murder me.  I should have been adead man if you had not come up."

"He lies!" said my convict, with fierce energy.  "He's a liar born,and he'll die a liar.  Look at his face; ain't it written there?  Lethim turn those eyes of his on me.  I defy him to do it."

The other, with an effort at a scornful smile, which could not,however, collect the nervous working of his mouth into any setexpression, looked at the soldiers, and looked about at themarshes and at the sky, but certainly did not look at the speaker.

"Do you see him?" pursued my convict.  "Do you see what a villain heis?  Do you see those grovelling and wandering eyes?  That's how helooked when we were tried together.  He never looked at me."

The other, always working and working his dry lips and turning hiseyes restlessly about him far and near, did at last turn them for amoment on the speaker, with the words, "You are not much to lookat," and with a half-taunting glance at the bound hands.  At thatpoint, my convict became so frantically exasperated, that he wouldhave rushed upon him but for the interposition of the soldiers."Didn't I tell you," said the other convict then, "that he wouldmurder me, if he could?"  And any one could see that he shook withfear, and that there broke out upon his lips curious white flakes,like thin snow.

"Enough of this parley," said the sergeant.  "Light those torches."

As one of the soldiers, who carried a basket in lieu of a gun, wentdown on his knee to open it, my convict looked round him for thefirst time, and saw me.  I had alighted from Joe's back on the brinkof the ditch when we came up, and had not moved since.  I looked athim eagerly when he looked at me, and slightly moved my hands andshook my head.  I had been waiting for him to see me that I mighttry to assure him of my innocence.  It was not at all expressed tome that he even comprehended my intention, for he gave me a lookthat I did not understand, and it all passed in a moment.  But if hehad looked at me for an hour or for a day, I could not haveremembered his face ever afterwards, as having been more attentive.

The soldier with the basket soon got a light, and lighted three orfour torches, and took one himself and distributed the others.  Ithad been almost dark before, but now it seemed quite dark, and soonafterwards very dark.  Before we departed from that spot, foursoldiers standing in a ring, fired twice into the air.  Presently wesaw other torches kindled at some distance behind us, and others onthe marshes on the opposite bank of the river.  "All right," saidthe sergeant.  "March."

We had not gone far when three cannon were fired ahead of us with asound that seemed to burst something inside my ear.  "You areexpected on board," said the sergeant to my convict; "they know youare coming.  Don't straggle, my man.  Close up here."

The two were kept apart, and each walked surrounded by a separateguard.  I had hold of Joe's hand now, and Joe carried one of thetorches.  Mr. Wopsle had been for going back, but Joe was resolved tosee it out, so we went on with the party.  There was a reasonablygood path now, mostly on the edge of the river, with a divergencehere and there where a dike came, with a miniature windmill on itand a muddy sluice-gate.  When I looked round, I could see the otherlights coming in after us.  The torches we carried dropped greatblotches of fire upon the track, and I could see those, too, lyingsmoking and flaring.  I could see nothing else but black darkness.Our lights warmed the air about us with their pitchy blaze, and thetwo prisoners seemed rather to like that, as they limped along inthe midst of the muskets.  We could not go fast, because of theirlameness; and they were so spent, that two or three times we had tohalt while they rested.

After an hour or so of this travelling, we came to a rough woodenhut and a landing-place.  There was a guard in the hut, and theychallenged, and the sergeant answered.  Then, we went into the hut,where there was a smell of tobacco and whitewash, and a brightfire, and a lamp, and a stand of muskets, and a drum, and a lowwooden bedstead, like an overgrown mangle without the machinery,capable of holding about a dozen soldiers all at once.  Three orfour soldiers who lay upon it in their great-coats were not muchinterested in us, but just lifted their heads and took a sleepystare, and then lay down again.  The sergeant made some kind ofreport, and some entry in a book, and then the convict whom I callthe other convict was drafted off with his guard, to go on boardfirst.

My convict never looked at me, except that once.  While we stood inthe hut, he stood before the fire looking thoughtfully at it, orputting up his feet by turns upon the hob, and looking thoughtfullyat them as if he pitied them for their recent adventures.  Suddenly,he turned to the sergeant, and remarked,--

"I wish to say something respecting this escape.  It may preventsome persons laying under suspicion alonger me."

"You can say what you like," returned the sergeant, standing coollylooking at him with his arms folded, "but you have no call to sayit here.  You'll have opportunity enough to say about it, and hearabout it, before it's done with, you know."

"I know, but this is another pint, a separate matter.  A man can'tstarve; at least I can't.  I took some wittles, up at the willageover yonder,--where the church stands a'most out on the marshes."

"You mean stole," said the sergeant.

"And I'll tell you where from.  From the blacksmith's."

"Halloa!" said the sergeant, staring at Joe.

"Halloa, Pip!" said Joe, staring at me.

"It was some broken wittles--that's what it was--and a dram ofliquor, and a pie."

"Have you happened to miss such an article as a pie, blacksmith?"asked the sergeant, confidentially.

"My wife did, at the very moment when you came in.  Don't you know,Pip?"

"So," said my convict, turning his eyes on Joe in a moody manner,and without the least glance at me,--"so you're the blacksmith, areyou?  Than I'm sorry to say, I've eat your pie."

"God knows you're welcome to it,--so far as it was ever mine,"returned Joe, with a saving remembrance of Mrs. Joe.  "We don't knowwhat you have done, but we wouldn't have you starved to death forit, poor miserable fellow-creatur.--Would us, Pip?"

The something that I had noticed before, clicked in the man'sthroat again, and he turned his back.  The boat had returned, andhis guard were ready, so we followed him to the landing-place madeof rough stakes and stones, and saw him put into the boat, whichwas rowed by a crew of convicts like himself.  No one seemedsurprised to see him, or interested in seeing him, or glad to seehim, or sorry to see him, or spoke a word, except that somebody inthe boat growled as if to dogs, "Give way, you!" which was thesignal for the dip of the oars.  By the light of the torches, we sawthe black Hulk lying out a little way from the mud of the shore, likea wicked Noah's ark.  Cribbed and barred and moored by massive rustychains, the prison-ship seemed in my young eyes to be ironed likethe prisoners.  We saw the boat go alongside, and we saw him takenup the side and disappear.  Then, the ends of the torches were flunghissing into the water, and went out, as if it were all over withhim.

Chapter VI

My state of mind regarding the pilfering from which I had been sounexpectedly exonerated did not impel me to frank disclosure; butI hope it had some dregs of good at the bottom of it.

I do not recall that I felt any tenderness of conscience inreference to Mrs. Joe, when the fear of being found out was liftedoff me.  But I loved Joe,--perhaps for no better reason in thoseearly days than because the dear fellow let me love him,--and, asto him, my inner self was not so easily composed.  It was much uponmy mind (particularly when I first saw him looking about for hisfile) that I ought to tell Joe the whole truth.  Yet I did not, andfor the reason that I mistrusted that if I did, he would think meworse than I was.  The fear of losing Joe's confidence, and ofthenceforth sitting in the chimney corner at night staring drearilyat my forever lost companion and friend, tied up my tongue.  Imorbidly represented to myself that if Joe knew it, I neverafterwards could see him at the fireside feeling his fair whisker,without thinking that he was meditating on it.  That, if Joe knewit, I never afterwards could see him glance, however casually, atyesterday's meat or pudding when it came on to-day's table, withoutthinking that he was debating whether I had been in the pantry.That, if Joe knew it, and at any subsequent period of our jointdomestic life remarked that his beer was flat or thick, theconviction that he suspected Tar in it, would bring a rush of bloodto my face.  In a word, I was too cowardly to do what I knew to beright, as I had been too cowardly to avoid doing what I knew to bewrong.  I had had no intercourse with the world at that time, and Iimitated none of its many inhabitants who act in this manner.  Quitean untaught genius, I made the discovery of the line of action formyself.

As I was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship, Joetook me on his back again and carried me home.  He must have had atiresome journey of it, for Mr. Wopsle, being knocked up, was insuch a very bad temper that if the Church had been thrown open, hewould probably have excommunicated the whole expedition, beginningwith Joe and myself.  In his lay capacity, he persisted in sittingdown in the damp to such an insane extent, that when his coat wastaken off to be dried at the kitchen fire, the circumstantialevidence on his trousers would have hanged him, if it had been acapital offence.

By that time, I was staggering on the kitchen floor like a littledrunkard, through having been newly set upon my feet, and throughhaving been fast asleep, and through waking in the heat and lightsand noise of tongues.  As I came to myself (with the aid of a heavythump between the shoulders, and the restorative exclamation "Yah!Was there ever such a boy as this!" from my sister,) I found Joetelling them about the convict's confession, and all the visitorssuggesting different ways by which he had got into the pantry.  Mr.Pumblechook made out, after carefully surveying the premises, thathe had first got upon the roof of the forge, and had then got uponthe roof of the house, and had then let himself down the kitchenchimney by a rope made of his bedding cut into strips; and as Mr.Pumblechook was very positive and drove his own chaise-cart--overEverybody--it was agreed that it must be so.  Mr. Wopsle, indeed,wildly cried out, "No!" with the feeble malice of a tired man; but,as he had no theory, and no coat on, he was unanimously set atnaught,--not to mention his smoking hard behind, as he stood withhis back to the kitchen fire to draw the damp out:  which was notcalculated to inspire confidence.

This was all I heard that night before my sister clutched me, as aslumberous offence to the company's eyesight, and assisted me up tobed with such a strong hand that I seemed to have fifty boots on,and to be dangling them all against the edges of the stairs.  Mystate of mind, as I have described it, began before I was up in themorning, and lasted long after the subject had died out, and hadceased to be mentioned saving on exceptional occasions.

Chapter VII

At the time when I stood in the churchyard reading the familytombstones, I had just enough learning to be able to spell themout.  My construction even of their simple meaning was not verycorrect, for I read "wife of the Above" as a complimentaryreference to my father's exaltation to a better world; and if anyone of my deceased relations had been referred to as "Below," Ihave no doubt I should have formed the worst opinions of thatmember of the family.  Neither were my notions of the theologicalpositions to which my Catechism bound me, at all accurate; for, Ihave a lively remembrance that I supposed my declaration that I wasto "walk in the same all the days of my life," laid me under anobligation always to go through the village from our house in oneparticular direction, and never to vary it by turning down by thewheelwright's or up by the mill.

When I was old enough, I was to be apprenticed to Joe, and until Icould assume that dignity I was not to be what Mrs. Joe called"Pompeyed," or (as I render it) pampered.  Therefore, I was not onlyodd-boy about the forge, but if any neighbor happened to want anextra boy to frighten birds, or pick up stones, or do any such job,I was favored with the employment.  In order, however, that oursuperior position might not be compromised thereby, a money-box waskept on the kitchen mantel-shelf, in to which it was publicly madeknown that all my earnings were dropped.  I have an impression thatthey were to be contributed eventually towards the liquidation ofthe National Debt, but I know I had no hope of any personalparticipation in the treasure.

Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt kept an evening school in the village; thatis to say, she was a ridiculous old woman of limited means andunlimited infirmity, who used to go to sleep from six to sevenevery evening, in the society of youth who paid two pence per weekeach, for the improving opportunity of seeing her do it.  She renteda small cottage, and Mr. Wopsle had the room up stairs, where westudents used to overhear him reading aloud in a most dignified andterrific manner, and occasionally bumping on the ceiling.  There wasa fiction that Mr. Wopsle "examined" the scholars once a quarter.What he did on those occasions was to turn up his cuffs, stick uphis hair, and give us Mark Antony's oration over the body ofCaesar.  This was always followed by Collins's Ode on the Passions,wherein I particularly venerated Mr. Wopsle as Revenge throwing hisblood-stained sword in thunder down, and taking the War-denouncingtrumpet with a withering look.  It was not with me then, as it wasin later life, when I fell into the society of the Passions, andcompared them with Collins and Wopsle, rather to the disadvantageof both gentlemen.

Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt, besides keeping this EducationalInstitution, kept in the same room--a little general shop.  Shehad no idea what stock she had, or what the price of anything in itwas; but there was a little greasy memorandum-book kept in adrawer, which served as a Catalogue of Prices, and by this oracleBiddy arranged all the shop transaction.  Biddy was Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt's granddaughter; I confess myself quiet unequal to theworking out of the problem, what relation she was to Mr. Wopsle.  Shewas an orphan like myself; like me, too, had been brought up byhand.  She was most noticeable, I thought, in respect of herextremities; for, her hair always wanted brushing, her hands alwayswanted washing, and her shoes always wanted mending and pulling upat heel.  This description must be received with a week-daylimitation.  On Sundays, she went to church elaborated.

Much of my unassisted self, and more by the help of Biddy than ofMr. Wopsle's great-aunt, I struggled through the alphabet as if ithad been a bramble-bush; getting considerably worried and scratchedby every letter.  After that I fell among those thieves, the ninefigures, who seemed every evening to do something new to disguisethemselves and baffle recognition.  But, at last I began, in apurblind groping way, to read, write, and cipher, on the verysmallest scale.

One night I was sitting in the chimney corner with my slate,expending great efforts on the production of a letter to Joe.  Ithink it must have been a full year after our hunt upon themarshes, for it was a long time after, and it was winter and a hardfrost.  With an alphabet on the hearth at my feet for reference, Icontrived in an hour or two to print and smear this epistle:--

"MI DEER JO i OPE U R KR WITE WELL i OPE i SHAL SON B HABELL 4 2TEEDGE U JO AN THEN WE SHORL B SO GLODD AN WEN i M PRENGTD 2 U JOWOT LARX AN BLEVE ME INF XN PIP."

There was no indispensable necessity for my communicating with Joeby letter, inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were alone.  But Idelivered this written communication (slate and all) with my ownhand, and Joe received it as a miracle of erudition.

"I say, Pip, old chap!" cried Joe, opening his blue eyes wide,"what a scholar you are!  An't you?"

"I should like to be," said I, glancing at the slate as he held it;with a misgiving that the writing was rather hilly.

"Why, here's a J," said Joe, "and a O equal to anythink!  Here's a Jand a O, Pip, and a J-O, Joe."

I had never heard Joe read aloud to any greater extent than thismonosyllable, and I had observed at church last Sunday, when Iaccidentally held our Prayer-Book upside down, that it seemed tosuit his convenience quite as well as if it had been all right.Wishing to embrace the present occasion of finding out whether inteaching Joe, I should have to begin quite at the beginning, Isaid, "Ah!  But read the rest, Jo."

"The rest, eh, Pip?" said Joe, looking at it with a slow,searching eye, "One, two, three.  Why, here's three Js, and threeOs, and three J-O, Joes in it, Pip!"

I leaned over Joe, and, with the aid of my forefinger read him thewhole letter.

"Astonishing!" said Joe, when I had finished.  "You ARE a scholar."

"How do you spell Gargery, Joe?" I asked him, with a modestpatronage.

"I don't spell it at all," said Joe.

"But supposing you did?"

"It can't be supposed," said Joe.  "Tho' I'm uncommon fond ofreading, too."

"Are you, Joe?"

"On-common.  Give me," said Joe, "a good book, or a good newspaper,and sit me down afore a good fire, and I ask no better.  Lord!" hecontinued, after rubbing his knees a little, "when you do come to aJ and a O, and says you, "Here, at last, is a J-O, Joe," howinteresting reading is!"

I derived from this, that Joe's education, like Steam, was yetin its infancy, Pursuing the subject, I inquired,--

"Didn't you ever go to school, Joe, when you were as little as me?"

"No, Pip."

"Why didn't you ever go to school, Joe, when you were as little asme?"

"Well, Pip," said Joe, taking up the poker, and settling himself tohis usual occupation when he was thoughtful, of slowly raking thefire between the lower bars; "I'll tell you.  My father, Pip, hewere given to drink, and when he were overtook with drink, hehammered away at my mother, most onmerciful.  It were a'most theonly hammering he did, indeed, 'xcepting at myself.  And he hammeredat me with a wigor only to be equalled by the wigor with which hedidn't hammer at his anwil.--You're a listening and understanding,Pip?"

"Yes, Joe."

"'Consequence, my mother and me we ran away from my fatherseveral times; and then my mother she'd go out to work, and she'dsay, "Joe," she'd say, "now, please God, you shall have someschooling, child," and she'd put me to school.  But my father werethat good in his hart that he couldn't abear to be without us.  So,he'd come with a most tremenjous crowd and make such a row at thedoors of the houses where we was, that they used to be obligated tohave no more to do with us and to give us up to him.  And then hetook us home and hammered us.  Which, you see, Pip," said Joe,pausing in his meditative raking of the fire, and looking at me,"were a drawback on my learning."

"Certainly, poor Joe!"

"Though mind you, Pip," said Joe, with a judicial touch or two ofthe poker on the top bar, "rendering unto all their doo, andmaintaining equal justice betwixt man and man, my father were thatgood in his hart, don't you see?"

I didn't see; but I didn't say so.

"Well!" Joe pursued, "somebody must keep the pot a biling, Pip, orthe pot won't bile, don't you know?"

I saw that, and said so.

"'Consequence, my father didn't make objections to my going towork; so I went to work to work at my present calling, which werehis too, if he would have followed it, and I worked tolerable hard,I assure you, Pip.  In time I were able to keep him, and I kep himtill he went off in a purple leptic fit.  And it were my intentionsto have had put upon his tombstone that, Whatsume'er the failings onhis part, Remember reader he were that good in his heart."

Joe recited this couplet with such manifest pride and carefulperspicuity, that I asked him if he had made it himself.

"I made it," said Joe, "my own self.  I made it in a moment.  It waslike striking out a horseshoe complete, in a single blow.  I neverwas so much surprised in all my life,--couldn't credit my own ed,--to tell you the truth, hardly believed it were my own ed.  As I wassaying, Pip, it were my intentions to have had it cut over him; butpoetry costs money, cut it how you will, small or large, and itwere not done.  Not to mention bearers, all the money that could bespared were wanted for my mother.  She were in poor elth, and quitebroke.  She weren't long of following, poor soul, and her share ofpeace come round at last."

Joe's blue eyes turned a little watery; he rubbed first one ofthem, and then the other, in a most uncongenial and uncomfortablemanner, with the round knob on the top of the poker.

"It were but lonesome then," said Joe, "living here alone, and Igot acquainted with your sister.  Now, Pip,"--Joe looked firmly atme as if he knew I was not going to agree with him;--"your sisteris a fine figure of a woman."

I could not help looking at the fire, in an obvious state of doubt.

"Whatever family opinions, or whatever the world's opinions, onthat subject may be, Pip, your sister is," Joe tapped the top barwith the poker after every word following, "a-fine-figure--of--a--woman!"

I could think of nothing better to say than "I am glad you thinkso, Joe."

"So am I," returned Joe, catching me up.  "I am glad I think so,Pip.  A little redness or a little matter of Bone, here or there,what does it signify to Me?"

I sagaciously observed, if it didn't signify to him, to whom did itsignify?

"Certainly!" assented Joe.  "That's it.  You're right, old chap!  WhenI got acquainted with your sister, it were the talk how she wasbringing you up by hand.  Very kind of her too, all the folks said,and I said, along with all the folks.  As to you," Joe pursued witha countenance expressive of seeing something very nasty indeed, "ifyou could have been aware how small and flabby and mean you was,dear me, you'd have formed the most contemptible opinion ofyourself!"

Not exactly relishing this, I said, "Never mind me, Joe."

"But I did mind you, Pip," he returned with tender simplicity."When I offered to your sister to keep company, and to be asked inchurch at such times as she was willing and ready to come to theforge, I said to her, 'And bring the poor little child.  God blessthe poor little child,' I said to your sister, 'there's room forhim at the forge!'"

I broke out crying and begging pardon, and hugged Joe round theneck:  who dropped the poker to hug me, and to say, "Ever the bestof friends; an't us, Pip?  Don't cry, old chap!"

When this little interruption was over, Joe resumed:--

"Well, you see, Pip, and here we are!  That's about where it lights;here we are!  Now, when you take me in hand in my learning, Pip (andI tell you beforehand I am awful dull, most awful dull), Mrs. Joemustn't see too much of what we're up to.  It must be done, as I maysay, on the sly.  And why on the sly?  I'll tell you why, Pip."

He had taken up the poker again; without which, I doubt if he couldhave proceeded in his demonstration.

"Your sister is given to government."

"Given to government, Joe?"  I was startled, for I had some shadowyidea (and I am afraid I must add, hope) that Joe had divorced herin a favor of the Lords of the Admiralty, or Treasury.

"Given to government," said Joe.  "Which I meantersay the governmentof you and myself."

"Oh!"

"And she an't over partial to having scholars on the premises," Joecontinued, "and in partickler would not be over partial to my beinga scholar, for fear as I might rise.  Like a sort or rebel, don'tyou see?"

I was going to retort with an inquiry, and had got as far as"Why--" when Joe stopped me.

"Stay a bit.  I know what you're a going to say, Pip; stay a bit!  Idon't deny that your sister comes the Mo-gul over us, now andagain.  I don't deny that she do throw us back-falls, and that shedo drop down upon us heavy.  At such times as when your sister is onthe Ram-page, Pip," Joe sank his voice to a whisper and glanced atthe door, "candor compels fur to admit that she is a Buster."

Joe pronounced this word, as if it began with at least twelvecapital Bs.

"Why don't I rise?  That were your observation when I broke it off,Pip?"

"Yes, Joe."

"Well," said Joe, passing the poker into his left hand, that hemight feel his whisker; and I had no hope of him whenever he tookto that placid occupation; "your sister's a master-mind.  Amaster-mind."

"What's that?" I asked, in some hope of bringing him to a stand.But Joe was readier with his definition than I had expected, andcompletely stopped me by arguing circularly, and answering with afixed look, "Her."

"And I ain't a master-mind," Joe resumed, when he had unfixed hislook, and got back to his whisker.  "And last of all, Pip,--and thisI want to say very serious to you, old chap,--I see so much in mypoor mother, of a woman drudging and slaving and breaking herhonest hart and never getting no peace in her mortal days, that I'mdead afeerd of going wrong in the way of not doing what's right bya woman, and I'd fur rather of the two go wrong the t'other way,and be a little ill-conwenienced myself.  I wish it was only me thatgot put out, Pip; I wish there warn't no Tickler for you, old chap;I wish I could take it all on myself; but this is theup-and-down-and-straight on it, Pip, and I hope you'll overlookshortcomings."

Young as I was, I believe that I dated a new admiration of Joe fromthat night.  We were equals afterwards, as we had been before; but,afterwards at quiet times when I sat looking at Joe and thinkingabout him, I had a new sensation of feeling conscious that I waslooking up to Joe in my heart.

"However," said Joe, rising to replenish the fire; "here's theDutch-clock a working himself up to being equal to strike Eight of'em, and she's not come home yet!  I hope Uncle Pumblechook's maremayn't have set a forefoot on a piece o' ice, and gone down."

Mrs. Joe made occasional trips with Uncle Pumblechook onmarket-days, to assist him in buying such household stuffs andgoods as required a woman's judgment; Uncle Pumblechook being abachelor and reposing no confidences in his domestic servant.  Thiswas market-day, and Mrs. Joe was out on one of these expeditions.

Joe made the fire and swept the hearth, and then we went to thedoor to listen for the chaise-cart.  It was a dry cold night, andthe wind blew keenly, and the frost was white and hard.  A man woulddie to-night of lying out on the marshes, I thought.  And then Ilooked at the stars, and considered how awful if would be for a manto turn his face up to them as he froze to death, and see no helpor pity in all the glittering multitude.

"Here comes the mare," said Joe, "ringing like a peal of bells!"

The sound of her iron shoes upon the hard road was quite musical,as she came along at a much brisker trot than usual.  We got a chairout, ready for Mrs. Joe's alighting, and stirred up the fire thatthey might see a bright window, and took a final survey of thekitchen that nothing might be out of its place.  When we hadcompleted these preparations, they drove up, wrapped to the eyes.Mrs. Joe was soon landed, and Uncle Pumblechook was soon down too,covering the mare with a cloth, and we were soon all in thekitchen, carrying so much cold air in with us that it seemed todrive all the heat out of the fire.

"Now," said Mrs. Joe, unwrapping herself with haste and excitement,and throwing her bonnet back on her shoulders where it hung by thestrings, "if this boy ain't grateful this night, he never will be!"

I looked as grateful as any boy possibly could, who was whollyuninformed why he ought to assume that expression.

"It's only to be hoped," said my sister, "that he won't bePompeyed.  But I have my fears."

"She ain't in that line, Mum," said Mr. Pumblechook.  "She knowsbetter."

She?  I looked at Joe, making the motion with my lips and eyebrows,"She?"  Joe looked at me, making the motion with his lips andeyebrows, "She?"  My sister catching him in the act, he drew theback of his hand across his nose with his usual conciliatory air onsuch occasions, and looked at her.

"Well?" said my sister, in her snappish way.  "What are you staringat?  Is the house afire?"

"--Which some individual," Joe politely hinted, "mentioned--she."

"And she is a she, I suppose?" said my sister.  "Unless you callMiss Havisham a he.  And I doubt if even you'll go so far as that."

"Miss Havisham, up town?" said Joe.

"Is there any Miss Havisham down town?" returned my sister.

"She wants this boy to go and play there.  And of course he's going.And he had better play there," said my sister, shaking her head atme as an encouragement to be extremely light and sportive, "or I'llwork him."

I had heard of Miss Havisham up town,--everybody for miles roundhad heard of Miss Havisham up town,--as an immensely rich and grimlady who lived in a large and dismal house barricaded againstrobbers, and who led a life of seclusion.

"Well to be sure!" said Joe, astounded.  "I wonder how she come toknow Pip!"

"Noodle!" cried my sister.  "Who said she knew him?"

"--Which some individual," Joe again politely hinted, "mentionedthat she wanted him to go and play there."

"And couldn't she ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a boy to goand play there?  Isn't it just barely possible that UnclePumblechook may be a tenant of hers, and that he may sometimes--wewon't say quarterly or half-yearly, for that would be requiring toomuch of you--but sometimes--go there to pay his rent?  Andcouldn't she then ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a boy to goand play there?  And couldn't Uncle Pumblechook, being alwaysconsiderate and thoughtful for us--though you may not think it,Joseph," in a tone of the deepest reproach, as if he were the mostcallous of nephews, "then mention this boy, standing Prancing here"--which I solemnly declare I was not doing--"that I have for everbeen a willing slave to?"

"Good again!" cried Uncle Pumblechook.  "Well put!  Prettily pointed!Good indeed!  Now Joseph, you know the case."

"No, Joseph," said my sister, still in a reproachful manner, whileJoe apologetically drew the back of his hand across and across hisnose, "you do not yet--though you may not think it--know thecase.  You may consider that you do, but you do not, Joseph.  For youdo not know that Uncle Pumblechook, being sensible that foranything we can tell, this boy's fortune may be made by his goingto Miss Havisham's, has offered to take him into town to-night inhis own chaise-cart, and to keep him to-night, and to take him withhis own hands to Miss Havisham's to-morrow morning.  And Lor-a-mussyme!" cried my sister, casting off her bonnet in sudden desperation,"here I stand talking to mere Mooncalfs, with Uncle Pumblechookwaiting, and the mare catching cold at the door, and the boy grimedwith crock and dirt from the hair of his head to the sole of hisfoot!"

With that, she pounced upon me, like an eagle on a lamb, and myface was squeezed into wooden bowls in sinks, and my head was putunder taps of water-butts, and I was soaped, and kneaded, andtowelled, and thumped, and harrowed, and rasped, until I really wasquite beside myself.  (I may here remark that I suppose myself to bebetter acquainted than any living authority, with the ridgy effectof a wedding-ring, passing unsympathetically over the humancountenance.)

When my ablutions were completed, I was put into clean linen of thestiffest character, like a young penitent into sackcloth, and wastrussed up in my tightest and fearfullest suit.  I was thendelivered over to Mr. Pumblechook, who formally received me as if hewere the Sheriff, and who let off upon me the speech that I knew hehad been dying to make all along:  "Boy, be forever grateful to allfriends, but especially unto them which brought you up by hand!"

"Good-bye, Joe!"

"God bless you, Pip, old chap!"

I had never parted from him before, and what with my feelings andwhat with soapsuds, I could at first see no stars from thechaise-cart.  But they twinkled out one by one, without throwing anylight on the questions why on earth I was going to play at MissHavisham's, and what on earth I was expected to play at.

Chapter VIII

Mr. Pumblechook's premises in the High Street of the market town,were of a peppercorny and farinaceous character, as the premises ofa cornchandler and seedsman should be.  It appeared to me that hemust be a very happy man indeed, to have so many little drawers inhis shop; and I wondered when I peeped into one or two on the lowertiers, and saw the tied-up brown paper packets inside, whether theflower-seeds and bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out ofthose jails, and bloom.

It was in the early morning after my arrival that I entertainedthis speculation.  On the previous night, I had been sent straightto bed in an attic with a sloping roof, which was so low in thecorner where the bedstead was, that I calculated the tiles as beingwithin a foot of my eyebrows.  In the same early morning, Idiscovered a singular affinity between seeds and corduroys.  Mr.Pumblechook wore corduroys, and so did his shopman; and somehow,there was a general air and flavor about the corduroys, so much inthe nature of seeds, and a general air and flavor about the seeds,so much in the nature of corduroys, that I hardly knew which waswhich.  The same opportunity served me for noticing that Mr.Pumblechook appeared to conduct his business by looking across thestreet at the saddler, who appeared to transact his business bykeeping his eye on the coachmaker, who appeared to get on in lifeby putting his hands in his pockets and contemplating the baker,who in his turn folded his arms and stared at the grocer, who stoodat his door and yawned at the chemist.  The watchmaker, alwaysporing over a little desk with a magnifying-glass at his eye, andalways inspected by a group of smock-frocks poring over him throughthe glass of his shop-window, seemed to be about the only person inthe High Street whose trade engaged his attention.

Mr. Pumblechook and I breakfasted at eight o'clock in the parlorbehind the shop, while the shopman took his mug of tea and hunch ofbread and butter on a sack of peas in the front premises.  Iconsidered Mr. Pumblechook wretched company.  Besides being possessedby my sister's idea that a mortifying and penitential characterought to be imparted to my diet,--besides giving me as much crumbas possible in combination with as little butter, and putting sucha quantity of warm water into my milk that it would have been morecandid to have left the milk out altogether,--his conversationconsisted of nothing but arithmetic.  On my politely bidding himGood morning, he said, pompously, "Seven times nine, boy?"  And howshould I be able to answer, dodged in that way, in a strange place,on an empty stomach!  I was hungry, but before I had swallowed amorsel, he began a running sum that lasted all through thebreakfast.  "Seven?" "And four?" "And eight?" "And six?" "And two?""And ten?"  And so on.  And after each figure was disposed of, it wasas much as I could do to get a bite or a sup, before the next came;while he sat at his ease guessing nothing, and eating bacon and hotroll, in (if I may be allowed the expression) a gorging andgormandizing manner.

For such reasons, I was very glad when ten o'clock came and westarted for Miss Havisham's; though I was not at all at my easeregarding the manner in which I should acquit myself under thatlady's roof.  Within a quarter of an hour we came to Miss Havisham'shouse, which was of old brick, and dismal, and had a great manyiron bars to it.  Some of the windows had been walled up; of thosethat remained, all the lower were rustily barred.  There was acourtyard in front, and that was barred; so we had to wait, afterringing the bell, until some one should come to open it.  While wewaited at the gate, I peeped in (even then Mr. Pumblechook said,"And fourteen?" but I pretended not to hear him), and saw that atthe side of the house there was a large brewery.  No brewing was goingon in it, and none seemed to have gone on for a long long time.

A window was raised, and a clear voice demanded "What name?"  Towhich my conductor replied, "Pumblechook."  The voice returned,"Quite right," and the window was shut again, and a young lady cameacross the court-yard, with keys in her hand.

"This," said Mr. Pumblechook, "is Pip."

"This is Pip, is it?" returned the young lady, who was very prettyand seemed very proud; "come in, Pip."

Mr. Pumblechook was coming in also, when she stopped him with thegate.

"Oh!" she said.  "Did you wish to see Miss Havisham?"

"If Miss Havisham wished to see me," returned Mr. Pumblechook,discomfited.

"Ah!" said the girl; "but you see she don't."

She said it so finally, and in such an undiscussible way, that Mr.Pumblechook, though in a condition of ruffled dignity, could notprotest.  But he eyed me severely,--as if I had done anything tohim!--and departed with the words reproachfully delivered:  "Boy!Let your behavior here be a credit unto them which brought you upby hand!"  I was not free from apprehension that he would come backto propound through the gate, "And sixteen?"  But he didn't.

My young conductress locked the gate, and we went across thecourtyard.  It was paved and clean, but grass was growing in everycrevice.  The brewery buildings had a little lane of communicationwith it, and the wooden gates of that lane stood open, and all thebrewery beyond stood open, away to the high enclosing wall; andall was empty and disused.  The cold wind seemed to blow colderthere than outside the gate; and it made a shrill noise in howlingin and out at the open sides of the brewery, like the noise of windin the rigging of a ship at sea.

She saw me looking at it, and she said, "You could drink withouthurt all the strong beer that's brewed there now, boy."

"I should think I could, miss," said I, in a shy way.

"Better not try to brew beer there now, or it would turn out sour,boy; don't you think so?"

"It looks like it, miss."

"Not that anybody means to try," she added, "for that's all donewith, and the place will stand as idle as it is till it falls.  Asto strong beer, there's enough of it in the cellars already, todrown the Manor House."

"Is that the name of this house, miss?"

"One of its names, boy."

"It has more than one, then, miss?"

"One more.  Its other name was Satis; which is Greek, or Latin, orHebrew, or all three--or all one to me--for enough."

"Enough House," said I; "that's a curious name, miss."

"Yes," she replied; "but it meant more than it said.  It meant, whenit was given, that whoever had this house could want nothing else.They must have been easily satisfied in those days, I should think.But don't loiter, boy."

Though she called me "boy" so often, and with a carelessness thatwas far from complimentary, she was of about my own age.  She seemedmuch older than I, of course, being a girl, and beautiful andself-possessed; and she was as scornful of me as if she had beenone-and-twenty, and a queen.

We went into the house by a side door, the great front entrancehad two chains across it outside,--and the first thing I noticedwas, that the passages were all dark, and that she had left acandle burning there.  She took it up, and we went through morepassages and up a staircase, and still it was all dark, and onlythe candle lighted us.

At last we came to the door of a room, and she said, "Go in."

I answered, more in shyness than politeness, "After you, miss."

To this she returned:  "Don't be ridiculous, boy; I am not goingin."  And scornfully walked away, and--what was worse--took thecandle with her.

This was very uncomfortable, and I was half afraid.  However, theonly thing to be done being to knock at the door, I knocked, andwas told from within to enter.  I entered, therefore, and foundmyself in a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles.  Noglimpse of daylight was to be seen in it.  It was a dressing-room,as I supposed from the furniture, though much of it was of formsand uses then quite unknown to me.  But prominent in it was a drapedtable with a gilded looking-glass, and that I made out at firstsight to be a fine lady's dressing-table.

Whether I should have made out this object so soon if there hadbeen no fine lady sitting at it, I cannot say.  In an arm-chair,with an elbow resting on the table and her head leaning on thathand, sat the strangest lady I have ever seen, or shall ever see.

She was dressed in rich materials,--satins, and lace, and silks,--all of white.  Her shoes were white.  And she had a long white veildependent from her hair, and she had bridal flowers in her hair,but her hair was white.  Some bright jewels sparkled on her neck andon her hands, and some other jewels lay sparkling on the table.Dresses, less splendid than the dress she wore, and half-packedtrunks, were scattered about.  She had not quite finished dressing,for she had but one shoe on,--the other was on the table near herhand,--her veil was but half arranged, her watch and chain were notput on, and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets, andwith her handkerchief, and gloves, and some flowers, and aPrayer-Book all confusedly heaped about the looking-glass.

It was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things,though I saw more of them in the first moments than might besupposed.  But I saw that everything within my view which ought tobe white, had been white long ago, and had lost its lustre and wasfaded and yellow.  I saw that the bride within the bridal dress hadwithered like the dress, and like the flowers, and had nobrightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes.  I saw thatthe dress had been put upon the rounded figure of a young woman,and that the figure upon which it now hung loose had shrunk toskin and bone.  Once, I had been taken to see some ghastly waxworkat the Fair, representing I know not what impossible personagelying in state.  Once, I had been taken to one of our old marshchurches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that hadbeen dug out of a vault under the church pavement.  Now, waxwork andskeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at me.  Ishould have cried out, if I could.

"Who is it?" said the lady at the table.

"Pip, ma'am."

"Pip?"

"Mr. Pumblechook's boy, ma'am.  Come--to play."

"Come nearer; let me look at you.  Come close."

It was when I stood before her, avoiding her eyes, that I took noteof the surrounding objects in detail, and saw that her watch hadstopped at twenty minutes to nine, and that a clock in the room hadstopped at twenty minutes to nine.

"Look at me," said Miss Havisham.  "You are not afraid of a womanwho has never seen the sun since you were born?"

I regret to state that I was not afraid of telling the enormous liecomprehended in the answer "No."

"Do you know what I touch here?" she said, laying her hands, oneupon the other, on her left side.

"Yes, ma'am."  (It made me think of the young man.)

"What do I touch?"

"Your heart."

"Broken!"

She uttered the word with an eager look, and with strong emphasis,and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it.  Afterwardsshe kept her hands there for a little while, and slowly took themaway as if they were heavy.

"I am tired," said Miss Havisham.  "I want diversion, and I havedone with men and women.  Play."

I think it will be conceded by my most disputatious reader, thatshe could hardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything inthe wide world more difficult to be done under the circumstances.

"I sometimes have sick fancies," she went on, "and I have a sickfancy that I want to see some play.  There, there!" with an impatientmovement of the fingers of her right hand; "play, play, play!"

For a moment, with the fear of my sister's working me before myeyes, I had a desperate idea of starting round the room in theassumed character of Mr. Pumblechook's chaise-cart.  But I feltmyself so unequal to the performance that I gave it up, and stoodlooking at Miss Havisham in what I suppose she took for a doggedmanner, inasmuch as she said, when we had taken a good look at eachother,--

"Are you sullen and obstinate?"

"No, ma'am, I am very sorry for you, and very sorry I can't playjust now.  If you complain of me I shall get into trouble with mysister, so I would do it if I could; but it's so new here, and sostrange, and so fine,--and melancholy--."  I stopped, fearing I mightsay too much, or had already said it, and we took another look ateach other.

Before she spoke again, she turned her eyes from me, and looked atthe dress she wore, and at the dressing-table, and finally atherself in the looking-glass.

"So new to him," she muttered, "so old to me; so strange to him, sofamiliar to me; so melancholy to both of us!  Call Estella."

As she was still looking at the reflection of herself, I thoughtshe was still talking to herself, and kept quiet.

"Call Estella," she repeated, flashing a look at me.  "You can dothat.  Call Estella.  At the door."

To stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house,bawling Estella to a scornful young lady neither visible norresponsive, and feeling it a dreadful liberty so to roar out hername, was almost as bad as playing to order.  But she answered atlast, and her light came along the dark passage like a star.

Miss Havisham beckoned her to come close, and took up a jewel fromthe table, and tried its effect upon her fair young bosom andagainst her pretty brown hair.  "Your own, one day, my dear, and youwill use it well.  Let me see you play cards with this boy."

"With this boy?  Why, he is a common laboring boy!"

I thought I overheard Miss Havisham answer,--only it seemed soUnlikely,--"Well?  You can break his heart."

"What do you play, boy?" asked Estella of myself, with the greatestdisdain.

"Nothing but beggar my neighbor, miss."

"Beggar him," said Miss Havisham to Estella.  So we sat down tocards.

It was then I began to understand that everything in the room hadstopped, like the watch and the clock, a long time ago.  I noticedthat Miss Havisham put down the jewel exactly on the spot fromwhich she had taken it up.  As Estella dealt the cards, I glanced atthe dressing-table again, and saw that the shoe upon it, oncewhite, now yellow, had never been worn.  I glanced down at the footfrom which the shoe was absent, and saw that the silk stocking onit, once white, now yellow, had been trodden ragged.  Without thisarrest of everything, this standing still of all the pale decayedobjects, not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed formcould have looked so like grave-clothes, or the long veil so like ashroud.

So she sat, corpse-like, as we played at cards; the frillings andtrimmings on her bridal dress, looking like earthy paper.  I knewnothing then of the discoveries that are occasionally made ofbodies buried in ancient times, which fall to powder in the momentof being distinctly seen; but, I have often thought since, that shemust have looked as if the admission of the natural light of daywould have struck her to dust.

"He calls the knaves Jacks, this boy!" said Estella with disdain,before our first game was out.  "And what coarse hands he has!  Andwhat thick boots!"

I had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before; but Ibegan to consider them a very indifferent pair.  Her contempt for mewas so strong, that it became infectious, and I caught it.

She won the game, and I dealt.  I misdealt, as was only natural,when I knew she was lying in wait for me to do wrong; and shedenounced me for a stupid, clumsy laboring-boy.

"You say nothing of her," remarked Miss Havisham to me, as shelooked on.  "She says many hard things of you, but you say nothingof her.  What do you think of her?"

"I don't like to say," I stammered.

"Tell me in my ear," said Miss Havisham, bending down.

"I think she is very proud," I replied, in a whisper.

"Anything else?"

"I think she is very pretty."

"Anything else?"

"I think she is very insulting."  (She was looking at me then with alook of supreme aversion.)

"Anything else?"

"I think I should like to go home."

"And never see her again, though she is so pretty?"

"I am not sure that I shouldn't like to see her again, but I shouldlike to go home now."

"You shall go soon," said Miss Havisham, aloud.  "Play the gameout."

Saving for the one weird smile at first, I should have felt almostsure that Miss Havisham's face could not smile.  It had dropped intoa watchful and brooding expression,--most likely when all thethings about her had become transfixed,--and it looked as ifnothing could ever lift it up again.  Her chest had dropped, so thatshe stooped; and her voice had dropped, so that she spoke low, andwith a dead lull upon her; altogether, she had the appearance ofhaving dropped body and soul, within and without, under the weightof a crushing blow.

I played the game to an end with Estella, and she beggared me.  Shethrew the cards down on the table when she had won them all, as ifshe despised them for having been won of me.

"When shall I have you here again?" said Miss Havisham.  "Let methink."

I was beginning to remind her that to-day was Wednesday, when shechecked me with her former impatient movement of the fingers of herright hand.

"There, there!  I know nothing of days of the week; I know nothingof weeks of the year.  Come again after six days.  You hear?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"Estella, take him down.  Let him have something to eat, and let himroam and look about him while he eats.  Go, Pip."

I followed the candle down, as I had followed the candle up, andshe stood it in the place where we had found it.  Until she openedthe side entrance, I had fancied, without thinking about it, thatit must necessarily be night-time.  The rush of the daylight quiteconfounded me, and made me feel as if I had been in the candlelightof the strange room many hours.

"You are to wait here, you boy," said Estella; and disappeared andclosed the door.

I took the opportunity of being alone in the courtyard to look atmy coarse hands and my common boots.  My opinion of thoseaccessories was not favorable.  They had never troubled me before,but they troubled me now, as vulgar appendages.  I determined to askJoe why he had ever taught me to call those picture-cards Jacks,which ought to be called knaves.  I wished Joe had been rather moregenteelly brought up, and then I should have been so too.

She came back, with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer.She put the mug down on the stones of the yard, and gave me thebread and meat without looking at me, as insolently as if I were adog in disgrace.  I was so humiliated, hurt, spurned, offended,angry, sorry,--I cannot hit upon the right name for the smart--Godknows what its name was,--that tears started to my eyes.  The momentthey sprang there, the girl looked at me with a quick delight inhaving been the cause of them.  This gave me power to keep them backand to look at her:  so, she gave a contemptuous toss--but with asense, I thought, of having made too sure that I was so wounded--and left me.

But when she was gone, I looked about me for a place to hide myface in, and got behind one of the gates in the brewery-lane, andleaned my sleeve against the wall there, and leaned my forehead onit and cried.  As I cried, I kicked the wall, and took a hard twistat my hair; so bitter were my feelings, and so sharp was the smartwithout a name, that needed counteraction.

My sister's bringing up had made me sensitive.  In the little worldin which children have their existence whosoever brings them up,there is nothing so finely perceived and so finely felt asinjustice.  It may be only small injustice that the child can beexposed to; but the child is small, and its world is small, and itsrocking-horse stands as many hands high, according to scale, as abig-boned Irish hunter.  Within myself, I had sustained, from mybabyhood, a perpetual conflict with injustice.  I had known, fromthe time when I could speak, that my sister, in her capricious andviolent coercion, was unjust to me.  I had cherished a profoundconviction that her bringing me up by hand gave her no right tobring me up by jerks.  Through all my punishments, disgraces, fasts,and vigils, and other penitential performances, I had nursed thisassurance; and to my communing so much with it, in a solitary andunprotected way, I in great part refer the fact that I was morallytimid and very sensitive.

I got rid of my injured feelings for the time by kicking them intothe brewery wall, and twisting them out of my hair, and then Ismoothed my face with my sleeve, and came from behind the gate.  Thebread and meat were acceptable, and the beer was warming andtingling, and I was soon in spirits to look about me.

To be sure, it was a deserted place, down to the pigeon-house inthe brewery-yard, which had been blown crooked on its pole by somehigh wind, and would have made the pigeons think themselves at sea,if there had been any pigeons there to be rocked by it.  But therewere no pigeons in the dove-cot, no horses in the stable, no pigsin the sty, no malt in the storehouse, no smells of grains andbeer in the copper or the vat.  All the uses and scents of thebrewery might have evaporated with its last reek of smoke.  In aby-yard, there was a wilderness of empty casks, which had a certainsour remembrance of better days lingering about them; but it wastoo sour to be accepted as a sample of the beer that was gone,--andin this respect I remember those recluses as being like mostothers.

Behind the furthest end of the brewery, was a rank garden with anold wall; not so high but that I could struggle up and hold on longenough to look over it, and see that the rank garden was the gardenof the house, and that it was overgrown with tangled weeds, butthat there was a track upon the green and yellow paths, as if someone sometimes walked there, and that Estella was walking away fromme even then.  But she seemed to be everywhere.  For when I yieldedto the temptation presented by the casks, and began to walk onthem, I saw her walking on them at the end of the yard of casks.She had her back towards me, and held her pretty brown hair spreadout in her two hands, and never looked round, and passed out of myview directly.  So, in the brewery itself,--by which I mean thelarge paved lofty place in which they used to make the beer, andwhere the brewing utensils still were.  When I first went into it,and, rather oppressed by its gloom, stood near the door lookingabout me, I saw her pass among the extinguished fires, and ascendsome light iron stairs, and go out by a gallery high overhead, asif she were going out into the sky.

It was in this place, and at this moment, that a strange thinghappened to my fancy.  I thought it a strange thing then, and Ithought it a stranger thing long afterwards.  I turned my eyes--alittle dimmed by looking up at the frosty light--towards a greatwooden beam in a low nook of the building near me on my right hand,and I saw a figure hanging there by the neck.  A figure all inyellow white, with but one shoe to the feet; and it hung so, that Icould see that the faded trimmings of the dress were like earthypaper, and that the face was Miss Havisham's, with a movement goingover the whole countenance as if she were trying to call to me.  Inthe terror of seeing the figure, and in the terror of being certainthat it had not been there a moment before, I at first ran from it,and then ran towards it.  And my terror was greatest of all when Ifound no figure there.

Nothing less than the frosty light of the cheerful sky, the sightof people passing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate, and thereviving influence of the rest of the bread and meat and beer,would have brought me round.  Even with those aids, I might not havecome to myself as soon as I did, but that I saw Estella approachingwith the keys, to let me out.  She would have some fair reason forlooking down upon me, I thought, if she saw me frightened; and shewould have no fair reason.

She gave me a triumphant glance in passing me, as if she rejoicedthat my hands were so coarse and my boots were so thick, and sheopened the gate, and stood holding it.  I was passing out withoutlooking at her, when she touched me with a taunting hand.

"Why don't you cry?"

"Because I don't want to."

"You do," said she.  "You have been crying till you are half blind,and you are near crying again now."

She laughed contemptuously, pushed me out, and locked the gate uponme.  I went straight to Mr. Pumblechook's, and was immensely relievedto find him not at home.  So, leaving word with the shopman on whatday I was wanted at Miss Havisham's again, I set off on thefour-mile walk to our forge; pondering, as I went along, on all Ihad seen, and deeply revolving that I was a common laboring-boy;that my hands were coarse; that my boots were thick; that I hadfallen into a despicable habit of calling knaves Jacks; that I wasmuch more ignorant than I had considered myself last night, andgenerally that I was in a low-lived bad way.

Chapter IX

When I reached home, my sister was very curious to know all aboutMiss Havisham's, and asked a number of questions.  And I soon foundmyself getting heavily bumped from behind in the nape of the neckand the small of the back, and having my face ignominiously shovedagainst the kitchen wall, because I did not answer those questionsat sufficient length.

If a dread of not being understood be hidden in the breasts ofother young people to anything like the extent to which it used tobe hidden in mine,--which I consider probable, as I have noparticular reason to suspect myself of having been a monstrosity,--it is the key to many reservations.  I felt convinced that if Idescribed Miss Havisham's as my eyes had seen it, I should not beunderstood.  Not only that, but I felt convinced that Miss Havishamtoo would not be understood; and although she was perfectlyincomprehensible to me, I entertained an impression that therewould be something coarse and treacherous in my dragging her as shereally was (to say nothing of Miss Estella) before thecontemplation of Mrs. Joe.  Consequently, I said as little as Icould, and had my face shoved against the kitchen wall.

The worst of it was that that bullying old Pumblechook, preyed uponby a devouring curiosity to be informed of all I had seen andheard, came gaping over in his chaise-cart at tea-time, to have thedetails divulged to him.  And the mere sight of the torment, withhis fishy eyes and mouth open, his sandy hair inquisitively on end,and his waistcoat heaving with windy arithmetic, made me vicious inmy reticence.

"Well, boy," Uncle Pumblechook began, as soon as he was seated inthe chair of honor by the fire.  "How did you get on up town?"

I answered, "Pretty well, sir," and my sister shook her fist at me.

"Pretty well?" Mr. Pumblechook repeated.  "Pretty well is no answer.Tell us what you mean by pretty well, boy?"

Whitewash on the forehead hardens the brain into a state ofobstinacy perhaps.  Anyhow, with whitewash from the wall on myforehead, my obstinacy was adamantine.  I reflected for some time,and then answered as if I had discovered a new idea, "I mean prettywell."

My sister with an exclamation of impatience was going to fly at me,--I had no shadow of defence, for Joe was busy in the forge,--when Mr.Pumblechook interposed with "No!  Don't lose your temper.  Leave thislad to me, ma'am; leave this lad to me."  Mr. Pumblechook then turnedme towards him, as if he were going to cut my hair, and said,--

"First(to get our thoughts in order):  Forty-three pence?"

I calculated the consequences of replying "Four Hundred Pound," andfinding them against me, went as near the answer as I could--whichwas somewhere about eightpence off.  Mr. Pumblechook then put methrough my pence-table from "twelve pence make one shilling," up to"forty pence make three and fourpence," and then triumphantlydemanded, as if he had done for me, "Now!  How much is forty-threepence?"  To which I replied, after a long interval of reflection, "Idon't know."  And I was so aggravated that I almost doubt if I didknow.

Mr. Pumblechook worked his head like a screw to screw it out of me,and said, "Is forty-three pence seven and sixpence three fardens,for instance?"

"Yes!" said I.  And although my sister instantly boxed my ears, itwas highly gratifying to me to see that the answer spoilt his joke,and brought him to a dead stop.

"Boy!  What like is Miss Havisham?"  Mr. Pumblechook began again whenhe had recovered; folding his arms tight on his chest and applyingthe screw.

"Very tall and dark," I told him.

"Is she, uncle?" asked my sister.

Mr. Pumblechook winked assent; from which I at once inferred that hehad never seen Miss Havisham, for she was nothing of the kind.

"Good!" said Mr. Pumblechook conceitedly.  ("This is the way to havehim!  We are beginning to hold our own, I think, Mum?")

"I am sure, uncle," returned Mrs. Joe, "I wish you had him always;you know so well how to deal with him."

"Now, boy!  What was she a doing of, when you went in today?" askedMr. Pumblechook.

"She was sitting," I answered, "in a black velvet coach."

Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another--as they wellMight--and both repeated, "In a black velvet coach?"

"Yes," said I.  "And Miss Estella--that's her niece, I think--handed her in cake and wine at the coach-window, on a gold plate.And we all had cake and wine on gold plates.  And I got up behindthe coach to eat mine, because she told me to."

"Was anybody else there?" asked Mr. Pumblechook.

"Four dogs," said I.

"Large or small?"

"Immense," said I.  "And they fought for veal-cutlets out of asilver basket."

Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another again, in utteramazement.  I was perfectly frantic,--a reckless witness under thetorture,--and would have told them anything.

"Where was this coach, in the name of gracious?" asked my sister.

"In Miss Havisham's room."  They stared again.  "But there weren'tany horses to it."  I added this saving clause, in the moment ofrejecting four richly caparisoned coursers which I had had wildthoughts of harnessing.

"Can this be possible, uncle?" asked Mrs. Joe.  "What can the boymean?"

"I'll tell you, Mum," said Mr. Pumblechook.  "My opinion is, it's asedan-chair.  She's flighty, you know,--very flighty,--quite flightyenough to pass her days in a sedan-chair."

"Did you ever see her in it, uncle?" asked Mrs. Joe.

"How could I," he returned, forced to the admission, "when I neversee her in my life?  Never clapped eyes upon her!"

"Goodness, uncle!  And yet you have spoken to her?"

"Why, don't you know," said Mr. Pumblechook, testily, "that when Ihave been there, I have been took up to the outside of her door,and the door has stood ajar, and she has spoke to me that way.Don't say you don't know that, Mum.  Howsever, the boy went there toplay.  What did you play at, boy?"

"We played with flags," I said.  (I beg to observe that I think ofmyself with amazement, when I recall the lies I told on thisoccasion.)

"Flags!" echoed my sister.

"Yes," said I.  "Estella waved a blue flag, and I waved a red one,and Miss Havisham waved one sprinkled all over with little goldstars, out at the coach-window.  And then we all waved our swordsand hurrahed."

"Swords!" repeated my sister.  "Where did you get swords from?"

"Out of a cupboard," said I.  "And I saw pistols in it,--and jam,--and pills.  And there was no daylight in the room, but it was alllighted up with candles."

"That's true, Mum," said Mr. Pumblechook, with a grave nod.  "That'sthe state of the case, for that much I've seen myself."  And thenthey both stared at me, and I, with an obtrusive show ofartlessness on my countenance, stared at them, and plaited theright leg of my trousers with my right hand.

If they had asked me any more questions, I should undoubtedly havebetrayed myself, for I was even then on the point of mentioningthat there was a balloon in the yard, and should have hazarded thestatement but for my invention being divided between thatphenomenon and a bear in the brewery.  They were so much occupied,however, in discussing the marvels I had already presented fortheir consideration, that I escaped.  The subject still held themwhen Joe came in from his work to have a cup of tea.  To whom mysister, more for the relief of her own mind than for thegratification of his, related my pretended experiences.

Now, when I saw Joe open his blue eyes and roll them all round thekitchen in helpless amazement, I was overtaken by penitence; butonly as regarded him,--not in the least as regarded the other two.Towards Joe, and Joe only, I considered myself a young monster,while they sat debating what results would come to me from MissHavisham's acquaintance and favor.  They had no doubt that MissHavisham would "do something" for me; their doubts related to theform that something would take.  My sister stood out for "property."Mr. Pumblechook was in favor of a handsome premium for binding meapprentice to some genteel trade,--say, the corn and seed trade,for instance.  Joe fell into the deepest disgrace with both, foroffering the bright suggestion that I might only be presented withone of the dogs who had fought for the veal-cutlets.  "If a fool'shead can't express better opinions than that," said my sister, "andyou have got any work to do, you had better go and do it."  So hewent.

After Mr. Pumblechook had driven off, and when my sister was washingup, I stole into the forge to Joe, and remained by him until he haddone for the night.  Then I said, "Before the fire goes out, Joe, Ishould like to tell you something."

"Should you, Pip?" said Joe, drawing his shoeing-stool near theforge.  "Then tell us.  What is it, Pip?"

"Joe," said I, taking hold of his rolled-up shirt sleeve, andtwisting it between my finger and thumb, "you remember all thatabout Miss Havisham's?"

"Remember?" said Joe.  "I believe you!  Wonderful!"

"It's a terrible thing, Joe; it ain't true."

"What are you telling of, Pip?" cried Joe, falling back in thegreatest amazement.  "You don't mean to say it's--"

"Yes I do; it's lies, Joe."

"But not all of it?  Why sure you don't mean to say, Pip, that therewas no black welwet co--ch?"  For, I stood shaking my head.  "But atleast there was dogs, Pip?  Come, Pip," said Joe, persuasively, "ifthere warn't no weal-cutlets, at least there was dogs?"

"No, Joe."

"A dog?" said Joe.  "A puppy?  Come?"

"No, Joe, there was nothing at all of the kind."

As I fixed my eyes hopelessly on Joe, Joe contemplated me indismay.  "Pip, old chap!  This won't do, old fellow!  I say!  Where doyou expect to go to?"

"It's terrible, Joe; ain't it?"

"Terrible?" cried Joe.  "Awful!  What possessed you?"

"I don't know what possessed me, Joe," I replied, letting his shirtsleeve go, and sitting down in the ashes at his feet, hanging myhead; "but I wish you hadn't taught me to call Knaves at cardsJacks; and I wish my boots weren't so thick nor my hands socoarse."

And then I told Joe that I felt very miserable, and that I hadn'tbeen able to explain myself to Mrs. Joe and Pumblechook, who were sorude to me, and that there had been a beautiful young lady at MissHavisham's who was dreadfully proud, and that she had said I wascommon, and that I knew I was common, and that I wished I was notcommon, and that the lies had come of it somehow, though I didn'tknow how.

This was a case of metaphysics, at least as difficult for Joe todeal with as for me.  But Joe took the case altogether out of theregion of metaphysics, and by that means vanquished it.

"There's one thing you may be sure of, Pip," said Joe, after somerumination, "namely, that lies is lies.  Howsever they come, theydidn't ought to come, and they come from the father of lies, andwork round to the same.  Don't you tell no more of 'em, Pip.  Thatain't the way to get out of being common, old chap.  And as to beingcommon, I don't make it out at all clear.  You are oncommon in somethings.  You're oncommon small.  Likewise you're a oncommon scholar."

"No, I am ignorant and backward, Joe."

"Why, see what a letter you wrote last night!  Wrote in print even!I've seen letters--Ah! and from gentlefolks!--that I'll swearweren't wrote in print," said Joe.

"I have learnt next to nothing, Joe.  You think much of me.  It'sonly that."

"Well, Pip," said Joe, "be it so or be it son't, you must be acommon scholar afore you can be a oncommon one, I should hope!  Theking upon his throne, with his crown upon his ed, can't sit andwrite his acts of Parliament in print, without having begun, whenhe were a unpromoted Prince, with the alphabet.--Ah!" added Joe,with a shake of the head that was full of meaning, "and begun at A.too, and worked his way to Z.  And I know what that is to do, thoughI can't say I've exactly done it."

There was some hope in this piece of wisdom, and it ratherencouraged me.

"Whether common ones as to callings and earnings," pursued Joe,reflectively, "mightn't be the better of continuing for to keepcompany with common ones, instead of going out to play withoncommon ones,--which reminds me to hope that there were a flag,perhaps?"

"No, Joe."

"(I'm sorry there weren't a flag, Pip).  Whether that might be ormightn't be, is a thing as can't be looked into now, withoutputting your sister on the Rampage; and that's a thing not to bethought of as being done intentional.  Lookee here, Pip, at what issaid to you by a true friend.  Which this to you the true friendsay.  If you can't get to be oncommon through going straight, you'llnever get to do it through going crooked.  So don't tell no more on'em, Pip, and live well and die happy."

"You are not angry with me, Joe?"

"No, old chap.  But bearing in mind that them were which Imeantersay of a stunning and outdacious sort,--alluding to themwhich bordered on weal-cutlets and dog-fighting,--a sincerewell-wisher would adwise, Pip, their being dropped into yourmeditations, when you go up stairs to bed.  That's all, old chap,and don't never do it no more."

When I got up to my little room and said my prayers, I did notforget Joe's recommendation, and yet my young mind was in thatdisturbed and unthankful state, that I thought long after I laid medown, how common Estella would consider Joe, a mere blacksmith; howthick his boots, and how coarse his hands.  I thought how Joe and mysister were then sitting in the kitchen, and how I had come up tobed from the kitchen, and how Miss Havisham and Estella never satin a kitchen, but were far above the level of such common doings.  Ifell asleep recalling what I "used to do" when I was at MissHavisham's; as though I had been there weeks or months, instead ofhours; and as though it were quite an old subject of remembrance,instead of one that had arisen only that day.

That was a memorable day to me, for it made great changes in me.But it is the same with any life.  Imagine one selected day struckout of it, and think how different its course would have been.Pause you who read this, and think for a moment of the long chainof iron or gold, of thorns or flowers, that would never have boundyou, but for the formation of the first link on one memorable day.

Chapter X

The felicitous idea occurred to me a morning or two later when Iwoke, that the best step I could take towards making myselfuncommon was to get out of Biddy everything she knew.  In pursuanceof this luminous conception I mentioned to Biddy when I went to Mr.Wopsle's great-aunt's at night, that I had a particular reason forwishing to get on in life, and that I should feel very much obligedto her if she would impart all her learning to me.  Biddy, who wasthe most obliging of girls, immediately said she would, and indeedbegan to carry out her promise within five minutes.

The Educational scheme or Course established by Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt may be resolved into the following synopsis.  The pupilsate apples and put straws down one another's backs, until Mr.Wopsle's great-aunt collected her energies, and made anindiscriminate totter at them with a birch-rod.  After receiving thecharge with every mark of derision, the pupils formed in line andbuzzingly passed a ragged book from hand to hand.  The book had analphabet in it, some figures and tables, and a little spelling,--that is to say, it had had once.  As soon as this volume began tocirculate, Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt fell into a state of coma,arising either from sleep or a rheumatic paroxysm.  The pupils thenentered among themselves upon a competitive examination on thesubject of Boots, with the view of ascertaining who could tread thehardest upon whose toes.  This mental exercise lasted until Biddymade a rush at them and distributed three defaced Bibles (shaped asif they had been unskilfully cut off the chump end of something),more illegibly printed at the best than any curiosities ofliterature I have since met with, speckled all over with ironmould,and having various specimens of the insect world smashed betweentheir leaves.  This part of the Course was usually lightened byseveral single combats between Biddy and refractory students.  Whenthe fights were over, Biddy gave out the number of a page, and thenwe all read aloud what we could,--or what we couldn't--in afrightful chorus; Biddy leading with a high, shrill, monotonousvoice, and none of us having the least notion of, or reverence for,what we were reading about.  When this horrible din had lasted acertain time, it mechanically awoke Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt, whostaggered at a boy fortuitously, and pulled his ears.  This wasunderstood to terminate the Course for the evening, and we emergedinto the air with shrieks of intellectual victory.  It is fair toremark that there was no prohibition against any pupil'sentertaining himself with a slate or even with the ink (when therewas any), but that it was not easy to pursue that branch of studyin the winter season, on account of the little general shop inwhich the classes were holden--and which was also Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt's sitting-room and bedchamber--being but faintlyilluminated through the agency of one low-spirited dip-candle andno snuffers.

It appeared to me that it would take time to become uncommon, underthese circumstances:  nevertheless, I resolved to try it, and thatvery evening Biddy entered on our special agreement, by impartingsome information from her little catalogue of Prices, under thehead of moist sugar, and lending me, to copy at home, a large oldEnglish D which she had imitated from the heading of somenewspaper, and which I supposed, until she told me what it was, tobe a design for a buckle.

Of course there was a public-house in the village, and of courseJoe liked sometimes to smoke his pipe there.  I had received strictorders from my sister to call for him at the Three Jolly Bargemen,that evening, on my way from school, and bring him home at myperil.  To the Three Jolly Bargemen, therefore, I directed my steps.

There was a bar at the Jolly Bargemen, with some alarmingly longchalk scores in it on the wall at the side of the door, whichseemed to me to be never paid off.  They had been there ever since Icould remember, and had grown more than I had.  But there was aquantity of chalk about our country, and perhaps the peopleneglected no opportunity of turning it to account.

It being Saturday night, I found the landlord looking rather grimlyat these records; but as my business was with Joe and not with him,I merely wished him good evening, and passed into the common roomat the end of the passage, where there was a bright large kitchenfire, and where Joe was smoking his pipe in company with Mr. Wopsleand a stranger.  Joe greeted me as usual with "Halloa, Pip, oldchap!" and the moment he said that, the stranger turned his headand looked at me.

He was a secret-looking man whom I had never seen before.  His headwas all on one side, and one of his eyes was half shut up, as if hewere taking aim at something with an invisible gun.  He had a pipein his mouth, and he took it out, and, after slowly blowing all hissmoke away and looking hard at me all the time, nodded.  So, Inodded, and then he nodded again, and made room on the settlebeside him that I might sit down there.

But as I was used to sit beside Joe whenever I entered that placeof resort, I said "No, thank you, sir," and fell into the space Joemade for me on the opposite settle.  The strange man, after glancingat Joe, and seeing that his attention was otherwise engaged, noddedto me again when I had taken my seat, and then rubbed his leg--ina very odd way, as it struck me.

"You was saying," said the strange man, turning to Joe, "that youwas a blacksmith."

"Yes.  I said it, you know," said Joe.

"What'll you drink, Mr.--?  You didn't mention your name,by the bye."

Joe mentioned it now, and the strange man called him by it."What'll you drink, Mr. Gargery?  At my expense?  To top up with?"

"Well," said Joe, "to tell you the truth, I ain't much in the habitof drinking at anybody's expense but my own."

"Habit?  No," returned the stranger, "but once and away, and on aSaturday night too.  Come!  Put a name to it, Mr. Gargery."

"I wouldn't wish to be stiff company," said Joe.  "Rum."

"Rum," repeated the stranger.  "And will the other gentlemanoriginate a sentiment."

"Rum," said Mr. Wopsle.

"Three Rums!" cried the stranger, calling to the landlord.  "Glassesround!"

"This other gentleman," observed Joe, by way of introducing Mr.Wopsle, "is a gentleman that you would like to hear give it out.Our clerk at church."

"Aha!" said the stranger, quickly, and cocking his eye at me.  "Thelonely church, right out on the marshes, with graves round it!"

"That's it," said Joe.

The stranger, with a comfortable kind of grunt over his pipe, puthis legs up on the settle that he had to himself.  He wore aflapping broad-brimmed traveller's hat, and under it a handkerchieftied over his head in the manner of a cap:  so that he showed nohair.  As he looked at the fire, I thought I saw a cunningexpression, followed by a half-laugh, come into his face.

"I am not acquainted with this country, gentlemen, but it seems asolitary country towards the river."

"Most marshes is solitary," said Joe.

"No doubt, no doubt.  Do you find any gypsies, now, or tramps, orvagrants of any sort, out there?"

"No," said Joe; "none but a runaway convict now and then.  And wedon't find them, easy.  Eh, Mr. Wopsle?"

Mr. Wopsle, with a majestic remembrance of old discomfiture,assented; but not warmly.

"Seems you have been out after such?" asked the stranger.

"Once," returned Joe.  "Not that we wanted to take them, youunderstand; we went out as lookers on; me, and Mr. Wopsle, and Pip.Didn't us, Pip?"

"Yes, Joe."

The stranger looked at me again,--still cocking his eye, as if hewere expressly taking aim at me with his invisible gun,--and said,"He's a likely young parcel of bones that.  What is it you callhim?"

"Pip," said Joe.

"Christened Pip?"

"No, not christened Pip."

"Surname Pip?"

"No," said Joe, "it's a kind of family name what he gave himselfwhen a infant, and is called by."

"Son of yours?"

"Well," said Joe, meditatively, not, of course, that it could bein anywise necessary to consider about it, but because it was theway at the Jolly Bargemen to seem to consider deeply abouteverything that was discussed over pipes,--"well--no.  No, heain't."

"Nevvy?" said the strange man.

"Well," said Joe, with the same appearance of profound cogitation,"he is not--no, not to deceive you, he is not--my nevvy."

"What the Blue Blazes is he?" asked the stranger.  Which appeared tome to be an inquiry of unnecessary strength.

Mr.  Wopsle struck in upon that; as one who knew all aboutrelationships, having professional occasion to bear in mind whatfemale relations a man might not marry; and expounded the tiesbetween me and Joe.  Having his hand in, Mr. Wopsle finished off witha most terrifically snarling passage from Richard the Third, andseemed to think he had done quite enough to account for it when headded, "--as the poet says."

And here I may remark that when Mr. Wopsle referred to me, heconsidered it a necessary part of such reference to rumple my hairand poke it into my eyes.  I cannot conceive why everybody of hisstanding who visited at our house should always have put me throughthe same inflammatory process under similar circumstances.  Yet I donot call to mind that I was ever in my earlier youth the subject ofremark in our social family circle, but some large-handed persontook some such ophthalmic steps to patronize me.

All this while, the strange man looked at nobody but me, and lookedat me as if he were determined to have a shot at me at last, andbring me down.  But he said nothing after offering his Blue Blazesobservation, until the glasses of rum and water were brought; andthen he made his shot, and a most extraordinary shot it was.

It was not a verbal remark, but a proceeding in dumb-show, and waspointedly addressed to me.  He stirred his rum and water pointedlyat me, and he tasted his rum and water pointedly at me.  And hestirred it and he tasted it; not with a spoon that was brought tohim, but with a file.

He did this so that nobody but I saw the file; and when he had doneit he wiped the file and put it in a breast-pocket.  I knew it to beJoe's file, and I knew that he knew my convict, the moment I sawthe instrument.  I sat gazing at him, spell-bound.  But he nowreclined on his settle, taking very little notice of me, andtalking principally about turnips.

There was a delicious sense of cleaning-up and making a quiet pausebefore going on in life afresh, in our village on Saturday nights,which stimulated Joe to dare to stay out half an hour longer onSaturdays than at other times.  The half-hour and the rum and waterrunning out together, Joe got up to go, and took me by the hand.

"Stop half a moment, Mr. Gargery," said the strange man.  "I thinkI've got a bright new shilling somewhere in my pocket, and if Ihave, the boy shall have it."

He looked it out from a handful of small change, folded it in somecrumpled paper, and gave it to me.  "Yours!" said he.  "Mind!  Yourown."

I thanked him, staring at him far beyond the bounds of goodmanners, and holding tight to Joe.  He gave Joe good-night, and hegave Mr. Wopsle good-night (who went out with us), and he gave meonly a look with his aiming eye,--no, not a look, for he shut itup, but wonders may be done with an eye by hiding it.

On the way home, if I had been in a humor for talking, the talkmust have been all on my side, for Mr. Wopsle parted from us at thedoor of the Jolly Bargemen, and Joe went all the way home with hismouth wide open, to rinse the rum out with as much air as possible.But I was in a manner stupefied by this turning up of my oldmisdeed and old acquaintance, and could think of nothing else.

My sister was not in a very bad temper when we presented ourselvesin the kitchen, and Joe was encouraged by that unusual circumstanceto tell her about the bright shilling.  "A bad un, I'll be bound,"said Mrs. Joe triumphantly, "or he wouldn't have given it to theboy!  Let's look at it."

I took it out of the paper, and it proved to be a good one.  "Butwhat's this?" said Mrs. Joe, throwing down the shilling and catchingup the paper.  "Two One-Pound notes?"

Nothing less than two fat sweltering one-pound notes that seemed tohave been on terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle-markets in the county.  Joe caught up his hat again, and ran withthem to the Jolly Bargemen to restore them to their owner.  While hewas gone, I sat down on my usual stool and looked vacantly at mysister, feeling pretty sure that the man would not be there.

Presently, Joe came back, saying that the man was gone, but thathe, Joe, had left word at the Three Jolly Bargemen concerning thenotes.  Then my sister sealed them up in a piece of paper, and putthem under some dried rose-leaves in an ornamental teapot on thetop of a press in the state parlor.  There they remained, anightmare to me, many and many a night and day.

I had sadly broken sleep when I got to bed, through thinking of thestrange man taking aim at me with his invisible gun, and of theguiltily coarse and common thing it was, to be on secret terms ofconspiracy with convicts,--a feature in my low career that I hadpreviously forgotten.  I was haunted by the file too.  A dreadpossessed me that when I least expected it, the file wouldreappear.  I coaxed myself to sleep by thinking of Miss Havisham's,next Wednesday; and in my sleep I saw the file coming at me out ofa door, without seeing who held it, and I screamed myself awake.

Chapter XI

At the appointed time I returned to Miss Havisham's, and myhesitating ring at the gate brought out Estella.  She locked itafter admitting me, as she had done before, and again preceded meinto the dark passage where her candle stood.  She took no notice ofme until she had the candle in her hand, when she looked over hershoulder, superciliously saying, "You are to come this way to-day,"and took me to quite another part of the house.

The passage was a long one, and seemed to pervade the whole squarebasement of the Manor House.  We traversed but one side of thesquare, however, and at the end of it she stopped, and put hercandle down and opened a door.  Here, the daylight reappeared, and Ifound myself in a small paved courtyard, the opposite side ofwhich was formed by a detached dwelling-house, that looked as if ithad once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinctbrewery.  There was a clock in the outer wall of this house.  Likethe clock in Miss Havisham's room, and like Miss Havisham's watch,it had stopped at twenty minutes to nine.

We went in at the door, which stood open, and into a gloomy roomwith a low ceiling, on the ground-floor at the back.  There was somecompany in the room, and Estella said to me as she joined it, "Youare to go and stand there boy, till you are wanted."  "There",being the window, I crossed to it, and stood "there," in a veryuncomfortable state of mind, looking out.

It opened to the ground, and looked into a most miserable corner ofthe neglected garden, upon a rank ruin of cabbage-stalks, and onebox-tree that had been clipped round long ago, like a pudding, andhad a new growth at the top of it, out of shape and of a differentcolor, as if that part of the pudding had stuck to the saucepanand got burnt.  This was my homely thought, as I contemplated thebox-tree.  There had been some light snow, overnight, and it laynowhere else to my knowledge; but, it had not quite melted from thecold shadow of this bit of garden, and the wind caught it up inlittle eddies and threw it at the window, as if it pelted me forcoming there.

I divined that my coming had stopped conversation in the room, andthat its other occupants were looking at me.  I could see nothing ofthe room except the shining of the fire in the window-glass, but Istiffened in all my joints with the consciousness that I was underclose inspection.

There were three ladies in the room and one gentleman.  Before I hadbeen standing at the window five minutes, they somehow conveyed tome that they were all toadies and humbugs, but that each of thempretended not to know that the others were toadies and humbugs:because the admission that he or she did know it, would have madehim or her out to be a toady and humbug.

They all had a listless and dreary air of waiting somebody'spleasure, and the most talkative of the ladies had to speak quiterigidly to repress a yawn.  This lady, whose name was Camilla, verymuch reminded me of my sister, with the difference that she wasolder, and (as I found when I caught sight of her) of a bluntercast of features.  Indeed, when I knew her better I began to thinkit was a Mercy she had any features at all, so very blank and highwas the dead wall of her face.

"Poor dear soul!" said this lady, with an abruptness of mannerquite my sister's.  "Nobody's enemy but his own!"

"It would be much more commendable to be somebody else's enemy,"said the gentleman; "far more natural."

"Cousin Raymond," observed another lady, "we are to love ourneighbor."

"Sarah Pocket," returned Cousin Raymond, "if a man is not his ownneighbor, who is?"

Miss Pocket laughed, and Camilla laughed and said (checking ayawn), "The idea!"  But I thought they seemed to think it rather agood idea too.  The other lady, who had not spoken yet, said gravelyand emphatically, "Very true!"

"Poor soul!" Camilla presently went on (I knew they had all beenlooking at me in the mean time), "he is so very strange!  Wouldanyone believe that when Tom's wife died, he actually could not beinduced to see the importance of the children's having the deepestof trimmings to their mourning?  'Good Lord!' says he, 'Camilla,what can it signify so long as the poor bereaved little things arein black?'  So like Matthew!  The idea!"

"Good points in him, good points in him," said Cousin Raymond;"Heaven forbid I should deny good points in him; but he never had,and he never will have, any sense of the proprieties."

"You know I was obliged," said Camilla,--"I was obliged to be firm.I said, 'It WILL NOT DO, for the credit of the family.'  I told himthat, without deep trimmings, the family was disgraced.  I criedabout it from breakfast till dinner.  I injured my digestion.  And atlast he flung out in his violent way, and said, with a D, 'Then doas you like.'  Thank Goodness it will always be a consolation to meto know that I instantly went out in a pouring rain and bought thethings."

"He paid for them, did he not?" asked Estella.

"It's not the question, my dear child, who paid for them," returnedCamilla.  "I bought them.  And I shall often think of that withpeace, when I wake up in the night."

The ringing of a distant bell, combined with the echoing of somecry or call along the passage by which I had come, interrupted theconversation and caused Estella to say to me, "Now, boy!"  On myturning round, they all looked at me with the utmost contempt, and,as I went out, I heard Sarah Pocket say, "Well I am sure!  Whatnext!" and Camilla add, with indignation, "Was there ever such afancy!  The i-de-a!"

As we were going with our candle along the dark passage, Estellastopped all of a sudden, and, facing round, said in her tauntingmanner, with her face quite close to mine,--

"Well?"

"Well, miss?" I answered, almost falling over her and checkingmyself.

She stood looking at me, and, of course, I stood looking at her.

"Am I pretty?"

"Yes; I think you are very pretty."

"Am I insulting?"

"Not so much so as you were last time," said I.

"Not so much so?"

"No."

She fired when she asked the last question, and she slapped my facewith such force as she had, when I answered it.

"Now?" said she.  "You little coarse monster, what do you think ofme now?"

"I shall not tell you."

"Because you are going to tell up stairs.  Is that it?"

"No," said I, "that's not it."

"Why don't you cry again, you little wretch?"

"Because I'll never cry for you again," said I.  Which was, Isuppose, as false a declaration as ever was made; for I wasinwardly crying for her then, and I know what I know of the painshe cost me afterwards.

We went on our way up stairs after this episode; and, as we weregoing up, we met a gentleman groping his way down.

"Whom have we here?" asked the gentleman, stopping and looking atme.

"A boy," said Estella.

He was a burly man of an exceedingly dark complexion, with anexceedingly large head, and a corresponding large hand.  He took mychin in his large hand and turned up my face to have a look at meby the light of the candle.  He was prematurely bald on the top ofhis head, and had bushy black eyebrows that wouldn't lie down butstood up bristling.  His eyes were set very deep in his head, andwere disagreeably sharp and suspicious.  He had a large watch-chain,and strong black dots where his beard and whiskers would have beenif he had let them.  He was nothing to me, and I could have had noforesight then, that he ever would be anything to me, but ithappened that I had this opportunity of observing him well.

"Boy of the neighborhood?  Hey?" said he.

"Yes, sir," said I.

"How do you come here?"

"Miss Havisham sent for me, sir," I explained.

"Well!  Behave yourself.  I have a pretty large experience of boys,and you're a bad set of fellows.  Now mind!" said he, biting theside of his great forefinger as he frowned at me, "you behaveyourself!"

With those words, he released me--which I was glad of, for hishand smelt of scented soap--and went his way down stairs.  Iwondered whether he could be a doctor; but no, I thought; hecouldn't be a doctor, or he would have a quieter and morepersuasive manner.  There was not much time to consider the subject,for we were soon in Miss Havisham's room, where she and everythingelse were just as I had left them.  Estella left me standing nearthe door, and I stood there until Miss Havisham cast her eyes uponme from the dressing-table.

"So!" she said, without being startled or surprised: "the days haveworn away, have they?"

"Yes, ma'am.  To-day is--"

"There, there, there!" with the impatient movement of her fingers."I don't want to know.  Are you ready to play?"

I was obliged to answer in some confusion, "I don't think I am,ma'am."

"Not at cards again?" she demanded, with a searching look.

"Yes, ma'am; I could do that, if I was wanted."

"Since this house strikes you old and grave, boy," said MissHavisham, impatiently, "and you are unwilling to play, are youwilling to work?"

I could answer this inquiry with a better heart than I had beenable to find for the other question, and I said I was quitewilling.

"Then go into that opposite room," said she, pointing at the doorbehind me with her withered hand, "and wait there till I come."

I crossed the staircase landing, and entered the room sheindicated.  From that room, too, the daylight was completelyexcluded, and it had an airless smell that was oppressive.  A firehad been lately kindled in the damp old-fashioned grate, and it wasmore disposed to go out than to burn up, and the reluctant smokewhich hung in the room seemed colder than the clearer air,--likeour own marsh mist.  Certain wintry branches of candles on the highchimney-piece faintly lighted the chamber; or it would be moreexpressive to say, faintly troubled its darkness.  It was spacious,and I dare say had once been handsome, but every discernible thingin it was covered with dust and mould, and dropping to pieces.  Themost prominent object was a long table with a tablecloth spread onit, as if a feast had been in preparation when the house and theclocks all stopped together.  An epergne or centre-piece of some kindwas in the middle of this cloth; it was so heavily overhung withcobwebs that its form was quite undistinguishable; and, as I lookedalong the yellow expanse out of which I remember its seeming togrow, like a black fungus, I saw speckle-legged spiders withblotchy bodies running home to it, and running out from it, as ifsome circumstances of the greatest public importance had justtranspired in the spider community.

I heard the mice too, rattling behind the panels, as if the sameoccurrence were important to their interests.  But the black beetlestook no notice of the agitation, and groped about the hearth in aponderous elderly way, as if they were short-sighted and hard ofhearing, and not on terms with one another.

These crawling things had fascinated my attention, and I waswatching them from a distance, when Miss Havisham laid a hand uponmy shoulder.  In her other hand she had a crutch-headed stick onwhich she leaned, and she looked like the Witch of the place.

"This," said she, pointing to the long table with her stick, "iswhere I will be laid when I am dead.  They shall come and look at mehere."

With some vague misgiving that she might get upon the table thenand there and die at once, the complete realization of the ghastlywaxwork at the Fair, I shrank under her touch.

"What do you think that is?" she asked me, again pointing with herstick; "that, where those cobwebs are?"

"I can't guess what it is, ma'am."

"It's a great cake.  A bride-cake.  Mine!"

She looked all round the room in a glaring manner, and then said,leaning on me while her hand twitched my shoulder, "Come, come,come!  Walk me, walk me!"

I made out from this, that the work I had to do, was to walk MissHavisham round and round the room.  Accordingly, I started at once,and she leaned upon my shoulder, and we went away at a pace thatmight have been an imitation (founded on my first impulse underthat roof) of Mr. Pumblechook's chaise-cart.

She was not physically strong, and after a little time said,"Slower!"  Still, we went at an impatient fitful speed, and as wewent, she twitched the hand upon my shoulder, and worked her mouth,and led me to believe that we were going fast because her thoughtswent fast.  After a while she said, "Call Estella!" so I went out onthe landing and roared that name as I had done on the previousoccasion.  When her light appeared, I returned to Miss Havisham, andwe started away again round and round the room.

If only Estella had come to be a spectator of our proceedings, Ishould have felt sufficiently discontented; but as she broughtwith her the three ladies and the gentleman whom I had seen below,I didn't know what to do.  In my politeness, I would have stopped;but Miss Havisham twitched my shoulder, and we posted on,--with ashame-faced consciousness on my part that they would think it wasall my doing.

"Dear Miss Havisham," said Miss Sarah Pocket.  "How well you look!"

"I do not," returned Miss Havisham.  "I am yellow skin and bone."

Camilla brightened when Miss Pocket met with this rebuff; and shemurmured, as she plaintively contemplated Miss Havisham, "Poor dearsoul!  Certainly not to be expected to look well, poor thing.  Theidea!"

"And how are you?" said Miss Havisham to Camilla.  As we were closeto Camilla then, I would have stopped as a matter of course, onlyMiss Havisham wouldn't stop.  We swept on, and I felt that I washighly obnoxious to Camilla.

"Thank you, Miss Havisham," she returned, "I am as well as can beexpected."

"Why, what's the matter with you?" asked Miss Havisham, withexceeding sharpness.

"Nothing worth mentioning," replied Camilla.  "I don't wish to makea display of my feelings, but I have habitually thought of you morein the night than I am quite equal to."

"Then don't think of me," retorted Miss Havisham.

"Very easily said!" remarked Camilla, amiably repressing a sob,while a hitch came into her upper lip, and her tears overflowed."Raymond is a witness what ginger and sal volatile I am obliged totake in the night.  Raymond is a witness what nervous jerkings Ihave in my legs.  Chokings and nervous jerkings, however, arenothing new to me when I think with anxiety of those I love.  If Icould be less affectionate and sensitive, I should have a betterdigestion and an iron set of nerves.  I am sure I wish it could beso.  But as to not thinking of you in the night--The idea!"  Here, aburst of tears.

The Raymond referred to, I understood to be the gentleman present,and him I understood to be Mr. Camilla.  He came to the rescue atthis point, and said in a consolatory and complimentary voice,"Camilla, my dear, it is well known that your family feelings aregradually undermining you to the extent of making one of your legsshorter than the other."

"I am not aware," observed the grave lady whose voice I had heardbut once, "that to think of any person is to make a great claimupon that person, my dear."

Miss Sarah Pocket, whom I now saw to be a little dry, brown,corrugated old woman, with a small face that might have been madeof walnut-shells, and a large mouth like a cat's without thewhiskers, supported this position by saying, "No, indeed, my dear.Hem!"

"Thinking is easy enough," said the grave lady.

"What is easier, you know?" assented Miss Sarah Pocket.

"Oh, yes, yes!" cried Camilla, whose fermenting feelings appearedto rise from her legs to her bosom.  "It's all very true!  It's aweakness to be so affectionate, but I can't help it.  No doubt myhealth would be much better if it was otherwise, still I wouldn'tchange my disposition if I could.  It's the cause of much suffering,but it's a consolation to know I posses it, when I wake up in thenight."  Here another burst of feeling.

Miss Havisham and I had never stopped all this time, but kept goinground and round the room; now brushing against the skirts of thevisitors, now giving them the whole length of the dismal chamber.

"There's Matthew!" said Camilla.  "Never mixing with any naturalties, never coming here to see how Miss Havisham is!  I have takento the sofa with my staylace cut, and have lain there hoursinsensible, with my head over the side, and my hair all down, andmy feet I don't know where--"

("Much higher than your head, my love," said Mr. Camilla.)

"I have gone off into that state, hours and hours, on account ofMatthew's strange and inexplicable conduct, and nobody has thankedme."

"Really I must say I should think not!" interposed the grave lady.

"You see, my dear," added Miss Sarah Pocket (a blandly viciouspersonage), "the question to put to yourself is, who did you expectto thank you, my love?"

"Without expecting any thanks, or anything of the sort," resumedCamilla, "I have remained in that state, hours and hours, andRaymond is a witness of the extent to which I have choked, and whatthe total inefficacy of ginger has been, and I have been heard atthe piano-forte tuner's across the street, where the poor mistakenchildren have even supposed it to be pigeons cooing at adistance,--and now to be told--"  Here Camilla put her hand to herthroat, and began to be quite chemical as to the formation of newcombinations there.

When this same Matthew was mentioned, Miss Havisham stopped me andherself, and stood looking at the speaker.  This change had a greatinfluence in bringing Camilla's chemistry to a sudden end.

"Matthew will come and see me at last," said Miss Havisham,sternly, when I am laid on that table.  That will be his place,--there," striking the table with her stick, "at my head!  And yourswill be there!  And your husband's there!  And Sarah Pocket's there!And Georgiana's there!  Now you all know where to take your stationswhen you come to feast upon me.  And now go!"

At the mention of each name, she had struck the table with herstick in a new place.  She now said, "Walk me, walk me!" and we wenton again.

"I suppose there's nothing to be done," exclaimed Camilla, "butcomply and depart.  It's something to have seen the object of one'slove and duty for even so short a time.  I shall think of it with amelancholy satisfaction when I wake up in the night.  I wish Matthewcould have that comfort, but he sets it at defiance.  I amdetermined not to make a display of my feelings, but it's very hardto be told one wants to feast on one's relations,--as if one was aGiant,--and to be told to go.  The bare idea!"

Mr. Camilla interposing, as Mrs. Camilla laid her hand upon herheaving bosom, that lady assumed an unnatural fortitude of mannerwhich I supposed to be expressive of an intention to drop and chokewhen out of view, and kissing her hand to Miss Havisham, wasescorted forth.  Sarah Pocket and Georgiana contended who shouldremain last; but Sarah was too knowing to be outdone, and ambledround Georgiana with that artful slipperiness that the latter wasobliged to take precedence.  Sarah Pocket then made her separateeffect of departing with, "Bless you, Miss Havisham dear!" and witha smile of forgiving pity on her walnut-shell countenance for theweaknesses of the rest.

While Estella was away lighting them down, Miss Havisham stillwalked with her hand on my shoulder, but more and more slowly.  Atlast she stopped before the fire, and said, after muttering andlooking at it some seconds,--

"This is my birthday, Pip."

I was going to wish her many happy returns, when she lifted herstick.

"I don't suffer it to be spoken of.  I don't suffer those who werehere just now, or any one to speak of it.  They come here on theday, but they dare not refer to it."

Of course I made no further effort to refer to it.

"On this day of the year, long before you were born, this heap ofdecay," stabbing with her crutched stick at the pile of cobwebs onthe table, but not touching it, "was brought here.  It and I haveworn away together.  The mice have gnawed at it, and sharper teeththan teeth of mice have gnawed at me."

She held the head of her stick against her heart as she stoodlooking at the table; she in her once white dress, all yellow andwithered; the once white cloth all yellow and withered; everythingaround in a state to crumble under a touch.

"When the ruin is complete," said she, with a ghastly look, "andwhen they lay me dead, in my bride's dress on the bride's table,--which shall be done, and which will be the finished curse upon him,--so much the better if it is done on this day!"

She stood looking at the table as if she stood looking at her ownfigure lying there.  I remained quiet.  Estella returned, and she tooremained quiet.  It seemed to me that we continued thus for a longtime.  In the heavy air of the room, and the heavy darkness thatbrooded in its remoter corners, I even had an alarming fancy thatEstella and I might presently begin to decay.

At length, not coming out of her distraught state by degrees, butin an instant, Miss Havisham said, "Let me see you two play cards;why have you not begun?"  With that, we returned to her room, andsat down as before; I was beggared, as before; and again, asbefore, Miss Havisham watched us all the time, directed myattention to Estella's beauty, and made me notice it the more bytrying her jewels on Estella's breast and hair.

Estella, for her part, likewise treated me as before, except thatshe did not condescend to speak.  When we had played some half-dozengames, a day was appointed for my return, and I was taken down intothe yard to be fed in the former dog-like manner.  There, too, I wasagain left to wander about as I liked.

It is not much to the purpose whether a gate in that garden wallwhich I had scrambled up to peep over on the last occasion was, onthat last occasion, open or shut.  Enough that I saw no gate then,and that I saw one now.  As it stood open, and as I knew thatEstella had let the visitors out,--for she had returned with thekeys in her hand,--I strolled into the garden, and strolled all overit.  It was quite a wilderness, and there were old melon-frames andcucumber-frames in it, which seemed in their decline to haveproduced a spontaneous growth of weak attempts at pieces of oldhats and boots, with now and then a weedy offshoot into thelikeness of a battered saucepan.

When I had exhausted the garden and a greenhouse with nothing init but a fallen-down grape-vine and some bottles, I found myself inthe dismal corner upon which I had looked out of the window.  Neverquestioning for a moment that the house was now empty, I looked inat another window, and found myself, to my great surprise,exchanging a broad stare with a pale young gentleman with redeyelids and light hair.

This pale young gentleman quickly disappeared, and reappearedbeside me.  He had been at his books when I had found myself staringat him, and I now saw that he was inky.

"Halloa!" said he, "young fellow!"

Halloa being a general observation which I had usually observed tobe best answered by itself, I said, "Halloa!" politely omittingyoung fellow.

"Who let you in?" said he.

"Miss Estella."

"Who gave you leave to prowl about?"

"Miss Estella."

"Come and fight," said the pale young gentleman.

What could I do but follow him?  I have often asked myself thequestion since; but what else could I do?  His manner was so final,and I was so astonished, that I followed where he led, as if I hadbeen under a spell.

"Stop a minute, though," he said, wheeling round before we had gonemany paces.  "I ought to give you a reason for fighting, too.  Thereit is!"  In a most irritating manner he instantly slapped his handsagainst one another, daintily flung one of his legs up behind him,pulled my hair, slapped his hands again, dipped his head, andbutted it into my stomach.

The bull-like proceeding last mentioned, besides that it wasunquestionably to be regarded in the light of a liberty, wasparticularly disagreeable just after bread and meat.  I thereforehit out at him and was going to hit out again, when he said,"Aha!  Would you?" and began dancing backwards and forwards in amanner quite unparalleled within my limited experience.

"Laws of the game!" said he.  Here, he skipped from his left leg onto his right.  "Regular rules!"  Here, he skipped from his right legon to his left.  "Come to the ground, and go through thepreliminaries!"  Here, he dodged backwards and forwards, and did allsorts of things while I looked helplessly at him.

I was secretly afraid of him when I saw him so dexterous; but Ifelt morally and physically convinced that his light head of haircould have had no business in the pit of my stomach, and that I hada right to consider it irrelevant when so obtruded on my attention.Therefore, I followed him without a word, to a retired nook of thegarden, formed by the junction of two walls and screened by somerubbish.  On his asking me if I was satisfied with the ground, andon my replying Yes, he begged my leave to absent himself for amoment, and quickly returned with a bottle of water and a spongedipped in vinegar.  "Available for both," he said, placing theseagainst the wall.  And then fell to pulling off, not only his jacketand waistcoat, but his shirt too, in a manner at oncelight-hearted, business-like, and bloodthirsty.

Although he did not look very healthy,--having pimples on his face,and a breaking out at his mouth,--these dreadful preparations quiteappalled me.  I judged him to be about my own age, but he was muchtaller, and he had a way of spinning himself about that was full ofappearance.  For the rest, he was a young gentleman in a gray suit(when not denuded for battle), with his elbows, knees, wrists, andheels considerably in advance of the rest of him as todevelopment.

My heart failed me when I saw him squaring at me with everydemonstration of mechanical nicety, and eyeing my anatomy as if hewere minutely choosing his bone.  I never have been so surprised inmy life, as I was when I let out the first blow, and saw him lyingon his back, looking up at me with a bloody nose and his faceexceedingly fore-shortened.

But, he was on his feet directly, and after sponging himself with agreat show of dexterity began squaring again.  The second greatestsurprise I have ever had in my life was seeing him on his backagain, looking up at me out of a black eye.

His spirit inspired me with great respect.  He seemed to have nostrength, and he never once hit me hard, and he was always knockeddown; but he would be up again in a moment, sponging himself ordrinking out of the water-bottle, with the greatest satisfaction inseconding himself according to form, and then came at me with anair and a show that made me believe he really was going to do forme at last.  He got heavily bruised, for I am sorry to record thatthe more I hit him, the harder I hit him; but he came up again andagain and again, until at last he got a bad fall with the back ofhis head against the wall.  Even after that crisis in our affairs,he got up and turned round and round confusedly a few times, notknowing where I was; but finally went on his knees to his spongeand threw it up:  at the same time panting out, "That means you havewon."

He seemed so brave and innocent, that although I had not proposedthe contest, I felt but a gloomy satisfaction in my victory.  Indeed,I go so far as to hope that I regarded myself while dressing as aspecies of savage young wolf or other wild beast.  However, I gotdressed, darkly wiping my sanguinary face at intervals, and I said,"Can I help you?" and he said "No thankee," and I said "Goodafternoon," and he said "Same to you."

When I got into the courtyard, I found Estella waiting with thekeys.  But she neither asked me where I had been, nor why I hadkept her waiting; and there was a bright flush upon her face, asthough something had happened to delight her.  Instead of goingstraight to the gate, too, she stepped back into the passage, andbeckoned me.

"Come here!  You may kiss me, if you like."

I kissed her cheek as she turned it to me.  I think I would havegone through a great deal to kiss her cheek.  But I felt that thekiss was given to the coarse common boy as a piece of money mighthave been, and that it was worth nothing.

What with the birthday visitors, and what with the cards, and whatwith the fight, my stay had lasted so long, that when I neared homethe light on the spit of sand off the point on the marshes wasgleaming against a black night-sky, and Joe's furnace was flinginga path of fire across the road.

Chapter XII

My mind grew very uneasy on the subject of the pale younggentleman.  The more I thought of the fight, and recalled the paleyoung gentleman on his back in various stages of puffy andincrimsoned countenance, the more certain it appeared thatsomething would be done to me.  I felt that the pale younggentleman's blood was on my head, and that the Law would avenge it.Without having any definite idea of the penalties I had incurred,it was clear to me that village boys could not go stalking aboutthe country, ravaging the houses of gentlefolks and pitching intothe studious youth of England, without laying themselves open tosevere punishment.  For some days, I even kept close at home, andlooked out at the kitchen door with the greatest caution andtrepidation before going on an errand, lest the officers of theCounty Jail should pounce upon me.  The pale young gentleman's nosehad stained my trousers, and I tried to wash out that evidence ofmy guilt in the dead of night.  I had cut my knuckles against thepale young gentleman's teeth, and I twisted my imagination into athousand tangles, as I devised incredible ways of accounting forthat damnatory circumstance when I should be haled before theJudges.

When the day came round for my return to the scene of the deed ofviolence, my terrors reached their height.  Whether myrmidons ofJustice, specially sent down from London, would be lying in ambushbehind the gate;--whether Miss Havisham, preferring to take personalvengeance for an outrage done to her house, might rise in thosegrave-clothes of hers, draw a pistol, and shoot me dead:--whethersuborned boys--a numerous band of mercenaries--might be engagedto fall upon me in the brewery, and cuff me until I was no more;--itwas high testimony to my confidence in the spirit of the pale younggentleman, that I never imagined him accessory to theseretaliations; they always came into my mind as the acts ofinjudicious relatives of his, goaded on by the state of his visageand an indignant sympathy with the family features.

However, go to Miss Havisham's I must, and go I did.  And behold!nothing came of the late struggle.  It was not alluded to in anyway, and no pale young gentleman was to be discovered on thepremises.  I found the same gate open, and I explored the garden,and even looked in at the windows of the detached house; but myview was suddenly stopped by the closed shutters within, and allwas lifeless.  Only in the corner where the combat had taken placecould I detect any evidence of the young gentleman's existence.There were traces of his gore in that spot, and I covered them withgarden-mould from the eye of man.

On the broad landing between Miss Havisham's own room and thatother room in which the long table was laid out, I saw agarden-chair,--a light chair on wheels, that you pushed frombehind.  It had been placed there since my last visit, and Ientered, that same day, on a regular occupation of pushing MissHavisham in this chair (when she was tired of walking with her handupon my shoulder) round her own room, and across the landing, andround the other room.  Over and over and over again, we would makethese journeys, and sometimes they would last as long as threehours at a stretch.  I insensibly fall into a general mention ofthese journeys as numerous, because it was at once settled that Ishould return every alternate day at noon for these purposes, andbecause I am now going to sum up a period of at least eight or tenmonths.

As we began to be more used to one another, Miss Havisham talkedmore to me, and asked me such questions as what had I learnt andwhat was I going to be?  I told her I was going to be apprenticed toJoe, I believed; and I enlarged upon my knowing nothing and wantingto know everything, in the hope that she might offer some helptowards that desirable end.  But she did not; on the contrary, sheseemed to prefer my being ignorant.  Neither did she ever give meany money,--or anything but my daily dinner,--nor ever stipulatethat I should be paid for my services.

Estella was always about, and always let me in and out, but nevertold me I might kiss her again.  Sometimes, she would coldlytolerate me; sometimes, she would condescend to me; sometimes, shewould be quite familiar with me; sometimes, she would tell meenergetically that she hated me.  Miss Havisham would often ask mein a whisper, or when we were alone, "Does she grow prettier andprettier, Pip?"  And when I said yes (for indeed she did), wouldseem to enjoy it greedily.  Also, when we played at cards MissHavisham would look on, with a miserly relish of Estella's moods,whatever they were.  And sometimes, when her moods were so many andso contradictory of one another that I was puzzled what to say ordo, Miss Havisham would embrace her with lavish fondness, murmuringsomething in her ear that sounded like "Break their hearts my prideand hope, break their hearts and have no mercy!"

There was a song Joe used to hum fragments of at the forge, ofwhich the burden was Old Clem.  This was not a very ceremonious wayof rendering homage to a patron saint, but I believe Old Clemstood in that relation towards smiths.  It was a song that imitatedthe measure of beating upon iron, and was a mere lyrical excuse forthe introduction of Old Clem's respected name.  Thus, you were tohammer boys round--Old Clem!  With a thump and a sound--Old Clem!Beat it out, beat it out--Old Clem!  With a clink for the stout--Old Clem!  Blow the fire, blow the fire--Old Clem!  Roaring dryer,soaring higher--Old Clem!  One day soon after the appearance of thechair, Miss Havisham suddenly saying to me, with the impatientmovement of her fingers, "There, there, there!  Sing!"  I wassurprised into crooning this ditty as I pushed her over the floor.It happened so to catch her fancy that she took it up in a lowbrooding voice as if she were singing in her sleep.  After that, itbecame customary with us to have it as we moved about, and Estellawould often join in; though the whole strain was so subdued, evenwhen there were three of us, that it made less noise in the grimold house than the lightest breath of wind.

What could I become with these surroundings?  How could my characterfail to be influenced by them?  Is it to be wondered at if mythoughts were dazed, as my eyes were, when I came out into thenatural light from the misty yellow rooms?

Perhaps I might have told Joe about the pale young gentleman, if Ihad not previously been betrayed into those enormous inventions towhich I had confessed.  Under the circumstances, I felt that Joecould hardly fail to discern in the pale young gentleman, anappropriate passenger to be put into the black velvet coach;therefore, I said nothing of him.  Besides, that shrinking fromhaving Miss Havisham and Estella discussed, which had come upon mein the beginning, grew much more potent as time went on.  I reposedcomplete confidence in no one but Biddy; but I told poor Biddyeverything.  Why it came natural to me to do so, and why Biddy had adeep concern in everything I told her, I did not know then, thoughI think I know now.

Meanwhile, councils went on in the kitchen at home, fraught withalmost insupportable aggravation to my exasperated spirit.  Thatass, Pumblechook, used often to come over of a night for the purposeof discussing my prospects with my sister; and I really do believe(to this hour with less penitence than I ought to feel), that ifthese hands could have taken a linchpin out of his chaise-cart,they would have done it.  The miserable man was a man of thatconfined stolidity of mind, that he could not discuss my prospectswithout having me before him,--as it were, to operate upon,--and hewould drag me up from my stool (usually by the collar) where I wasquiet in a corner, and, putting me before the fire as if I weregoing to be cooked, would begin by saying, "Now, Mum, here is thisboy!  Here is this boy which you brought up by hand.  Hold up yourhead, boy, and be forever grateful unto them which so did do.  Now,Mum, with respections to this boy!"  And then he would rumple myhair the wrong way,--which from my earliest remembrance, as alreadyhinted, I have in my soul denied the right of any fellow-creatureto do,--and would hold me before him by the sleeve,--a spectacle ofimbecility only to be equalled by himself.

Then, he and my sister would pair off in such nonsensicalspeculations about Miss Havisham, and about what she would do withme and for me, that I used to want--quite painfully--to burstinto spiteful tears, fly at Pumblechook, and pummel him all over.In these dialogues, my sister spoke to me as if she were morallywrenching one of my teeth out at every reference; while Pumblechookhimself, self-constituted my patron, would sit supervising me witha depreciatory eye, like the architect of my fortunes who thoughthimself engaged on a very unremunerative job.

In these discussions, Joe bore no part.  But he was often talked at,while they were in progress, by reason of Mrs. Joe's perceiving thathe was not favorable to my being taken from the forge.  I was fullyold enough now to be apprenticed to Joe; and when Joe sat with thepoker on his knees thoughtfully raking out the ashes between thelower bars, my sister would so distinctly construe that innocentaction into opposition on his part, that she would dive at him,take the poker out of his hands, shake him, and put it away.  Therewas a most irritating end to every one of these debates.  All in amoment, with nothing to lead up to it, my sister would stop herselfin a yawn, and catching sight of me as it were incidentally, wouldswoop upon me with, "Come! there's enough of you!  You get along tobed; you've given trouble enough for one night, I hope!"  As if Ihad besought them as a favor to bother my life out.

We went on in this way for a long time, and it seemed likely thatwe should continue to go on in this way for a long time, when oneday Miss Havisham stopped short as she and I were walking, sheleaning on my shoulder; and said with some displeasure,--

"You are growing tall, Pip!"

I thought it best to hint, through the medium of a meditative look,that this might be occasioned by circumstances over which I had nocontrol.

She said no more at the time; but she presently stopped and lookedat me again; and presently again; and after that, looked frowningand moody.  On the next day of my attendance, when our usual exercisewas over, and I had landed her at her dressing-table, she stayed mewith a movement of her impatient fingers:--

"Tell me the name again of that blacksmith of yours."

"Joe Gargery, ma'am."

"Meaning the master you were to be apprenticed to?"

"Yes, Miss Havisham."

"You had better be apprenticed at once.  Would Gargery come herewith you, and bring your indentures, do you think?"

I signified that I had no doubt he would take it as an honor to beasked.

"Then let him come."

"At any particular time, Miss Havisham?"

"There, there!  I know nothing about times.  Let him come soon, andcome along with you."

When I got home at night, and delivered this message for Joe, mysister "went on the Rampage," in a more alarming degree than at anyprevious period.  She asked me and Joe whether we supposed she wasdoor-mats under our feet, and how we dared to use her so, and whatcompany we graciously thought she was fit for?  When she hadexhausted a torrent of such inquiries, she threw a candlestick atJoe, burst into a loud sobbing, got out the dustpan,--which wasalways a very bad sign,--put on her coarse apron, and begancleaning up to a terrible extent.  Not satisfied with a drycleaning, she took to a pail and scrubbing-brush, and cleaned usout of house and home, so that we stood shivering in the back-yard.It was ten o'clock at night before we ventured to creep in again,and then she asked Joe why he hadn't married a Negress Slave atonce?  Joe offered no answer, poor fellow, but stood feeling hiswhisker and looking dejectedly at me, as if he thought it reallymight have been a better speculation.

Chapter XIII

It was a trial to my feelings, on the next day but one, to see Joearraying himself in his Sunday clothes to accompany me to MissHavisham's.  However, as he thought his court-suit necessary to theoccasion, it was not for me tell him that he looked far better inhis working-dress; the rather, because I knew he made himself sodreadfully uncomfortable, entirely on my account, and that it wasfor me he pulled up his shirt-collar so very high behind, that itmade the hair on the crown of his head stand up like a tuft offeathers.

At breakfast-time my sister declared her intention of going to townwith us, and being left at Uncle Pumblechook's and called for "whenwe had done with our fine ladies"--a way of putting the case, fromwhich Joe appeared inclined to augur the worst.  The forge was shutup for the day, and Joe inscribed in chalk upon the door (as it washis custom to do on the very rare occasions when he was not atwork) the monosyllable HOUT, accompanied by a sketch of an arrowsupposed to be flying in the direction he had taken.

We walked to town, my sister leading the way in a very large beaverbonnet, and carrying a basket like the Great Seal of England inplaited Straw, a pair of pattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella,though it was a fine bright day.  I am not quite clear whether thesearticles were carried penitentially or ostentatiously; but Irather think they were displayed as articles of property,--much asCleopatra or any other sovereign lady on the Rampage might exhibither wealth in a pageant or procession.

When we came to Pumblechook's, my sister bounced in and left us.  Asit was almost noon, Joe and I held straight on to Miss Havisham'shouse.  Estella opened the gate as usual, and, the moment sheappeared, Joe took his hat off and stood weighing it by the brim inboth his hands; as if he had some urgent reason in his mind forbeing particular to half a quarter of an ounce.

Estella took no notice of either of us, but led us the way that Iknew so well.  I followed next to her, and Joe came last.  When Ilooked back at Joe in the long passage, he was still weighing hishat with the greatest care, and was coming after us in long strideson the tips of his toes.

Estella told me we were both to go in, so I took Joe by thecoat-cuff and conducted him into Miss Havisham's presence.  She wasseated at her dressing-table, and looked round at us immediately.

"Oh!" said she to Joe.  "You are the husband of the sister of thisboy?"

I could hardly have imagined dear old Joe looking so unlike himselfor so like some extraordinary bird; standing as he didspeechless, with his tuft of feathers ruffled, and his mouth openas if he wanted a worm.

"You are the husband," repeated Miss Havisham, "of the sister ofthis boy?"

It was very aggravating; but, throughout the interview, Joepersisted in addressing Me instead of Miss Havisham.

"Which I meantersay, Pip," Joe now observed in a manner that was atonce expressive of forcible argumentation, strict confidence, andgreat politeness, "as I hup and married your sister, and I were atthe time what you might call (if you was anyways inclined) a singleman."

"Well!" said Miss Havisham.  "And you have reared the boy, with theintention of taking him for your apprentice; is that so, Mr.Gargery?"

"You know, Pip," replied Joe, "as you and me were ever friends, andit were looked for'ard to betwixt us, as being calc'lated to leadto larks.  Not but what, Pip, if you had ever made objections to thebusiness,--such as its being open to black and sut, or such-like,--not but what they would have been attended to, don't you see?"

"Has the boy," said Miss Havisham, "ever made any objection?  Doeshe like the trade?"

"Which it is well beknown to yourself, Pip," returned Joe,strengthening his former mixture of argumentation, confidence, andpoliteness, "that it were the wish of your own hart."  (I saw theidea suddenly break upon him that he would adapt his epitaph to theoccasion, before he went on to say) "And there weren't no objectionon your part, and Pip it were the great wish of your hart!"

It was quite in vain for me to endeavor to make him sensible thathe ought to speak to Miss Havisham.  The more I made faces andgestures to him to do it, the more confidential, argumentative, andpolite, he persisted in being to Me.

"Have you brought his indentures with you?" asked Miss Havisham.

"Well, Pip, you know," replied Joe, as if that were a littleunreasonable, "you yourself see me put 'em in my 'at, and thereforeyou know as they are here."  With which he took them out, and gavethem, not to Miss Havisham, but to me.  I am afraid I was ashamed ofthe dear good fellow,--I know I was ashamed of him,--when I sawthat Estella stood at the back of Miss Havisham's chair, and thather eyes laughed mischievously.  I took the indentures out of hishand and gave them to Miss Havisham.

"You expected," said Miss Havisham, as she looked them over, "nopremium with the boy?"

"Joe!" I remonstrated, for he made no reply at all.  "Why don't youanswer--"

"Pip," returned Joe, cutting me short as if he were hurt, "which Imeantersay that were not a question requiring a answer betwixtyourself and me, and which you know the answer to be full well No.You know it to be No, Pip, and wherefore should I say it?"

Miss Havisham glanced at him as if she understood what he reallywas better than I had thought possible, seeing what he was there;and took up a little bag from the table beside her.

"Pip has earned a premium here," she said, "and here it is.  Thereare five-and-twenty guineas in this bag.  Give it to your master,Pip."

As if he were absolutely out of his mind with the wonder awakenedin him by her strange figure and the strange room, Joe, even atthis pass, persisted in addressing me.

"This is wery liberal on your part, Pip," said Joe, "and it is assuch received and grateful welcome, though never looked for, farnor near, nor nowheres.  And now, old chap," said Joe, conveying tome a sensation, first of burning and then of freezing, for I feltas if that familiar expression were applied to Miss Havisham,--"andnow, old chap, may we do our duty!  May you and me do our duty, bothon us, by one and another, and by them which your liberal present--have-conweyed--to be--for the satisfaction of mind-of--themas never--" here Joe showed that he felt he had fallen intofrightful difficulties, until he triumphantly rescued himself withthe words, "and from myself far be it!"  These words had such around and convincing sound for him that he said them twice.

"Good by, Pip!" said Miss Havisham.  "Let them out, Estella."

"Am I to come again, Miss Havisham?" I asked.

"No.  Gargery is your master now.  Gargery!  One word!"

Thus calling him back as I went out of the door, I heard her say toJoe in a distinct emphatic voice, "The boy has been a good boyhere, and that is his reward.  Of course, as an honest man, you willexpect no other and no more."

How Joe got out of the room, I have never been able to determine;but I know that when he did get out he was steadily proceedingup stairs instead of coming down, and was deaf to all remonstrancesuntil I went after him and laid hold of him.  In another minute wewere outside the gate, and it was locked, and Estella was gone.When we stood in the daylight alone again, Joe backed up against awall, and said to me, "Astonishing!"  And there he remained so longsaying, "Astonishing" at intervals, so often, that I began to thinkhis senses were never coming back.  At length he prolonged hisremark into "Pip, I do assure you this is as-TON-ishing!" and so, bydegrees, became conversational and able to walk away.

I have reason to think that Joe's intellects were brightened by theencounter they had passed through, and that on our way toPumblechook's he invented a subtle and deep design.  My reason is tobe found in what took place in Mr. Pumblechook's parlor:  where, onour presenting ourselves, my sister sat in conference with thatdetested seedsman.

"Well?" cried my sister, addressing us both at once.  "And what'shappened to you?  I wonder you condescend to come back to such poorsociety as this, I am sure I do!"

"Miss Havisham," said Joe, with a fixed look at me, like an effortof remembrance, "made it wery partick'ler that we should give her--were it compliments or respects, Pip?"

"Compliments," I said.

"Which that were my own belief," answered Joe; "her compliments toMrs. J. Gargery--"

"Much good they'll do me!" observed my sister; but rather gratifiedtoo.

"And wishing," pursued Joe, with another fixed look at me, likeanother effort of remembrance, "that the state of Miss Havisham'selth were sitch as would have--allowed, were it, Pip?"

"Of her having the pleasure," I added.

"Of ladies' company," said Joe.  And drew a long breath.

"Well!" cried my sister, with a mollified glance at Mr. Pumblechook."She might have had the politeness to send that message at first,but it's better late than never.  And what did she give youngRantipole here?"

"She giv' him," said Joe, "nothing."

Mrs. Joe was going to break out, but Joe went on.

"What she giv'," said Joe, "she giv' to his friends.  'And by hisfriends,' were her explanation, 'I mean into the hands of hissister Mrs. J. Gargery.'  Them were her words; 'Mrs. J. Gargery.'  Shemayn't have know'd," added Joe, with an appearance of reflection,"whether it were Joe, or Jorge."

My sister looked at Pumblechook:  who smoothed the elbows of hiswooden arm-chair, and nodded at her and at the fire, as if he hadknown all about it beforehand.

"And how much have you got?" asked my sister, laughing.  Positivelylaughing!

"What would present company say to ten pound?" demanded Joe.

"They'd say," returned my sister, curtly, "pretty well.  Not toomuch, but pretty well."

"It's more than that, then," said Joe.

That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook, immediately nodded, and said,as he rubbed the arms of his chair, "It's more than that, Mum."

"Why, you don't mean to say--" began my sister.

"Yes I do, Mum," said Pumblechook; "but wait a bit.  Go on, Joseph.Good in you!  Go on!"

"What would present company say," proceeded Joe, "to twenty pound?"

"Handsome would be the word," returned my sister.

"Well, then," said Joe, "It's more than twenty pound."

That abject hypocrite, Pumblechook, nodded again, and said, with apatronizing laugh, "It's more than that, Mum.  Good again!  Follow herup, Joseph!"

"Then to make an end of it," said Joe, delightedly handing the bagto my sister; "it's five-and-twenty pound."

"It's five-and-twenty pound, Mum," echoed that basest of swindlers,Pumblechook, rising to shake hands with her; "and it's no more thanyour merits (as I said when my opinion was asked), and I wish youjoy of the money!"

If the villain had stopped here, his case would have beensufficiently awful, but he blackened his guilt by proceeding totake me into custody, with a right of patronage that left all hisformer criminality far behind.

"Now you see, Joseph and wife," said Pumblechook, as he took me bythe arm above the elbow, "I am one of them that always go rightthrough with what they've begun.  This boy must be bound, out ofhand.  That's my way.  Bound out of hand."

"Goodness knows, Uncle Pumblechook," said my sister (grasping themoney), "we're deeply beholden to you."

"Never mind me, Mum, returned that diabolical cornchandler.  "Apleasure's a pleasure all the world over.  But this boy, you know;we must have him bound.  I said I'd see to it--to tell you thetruth."

The Justices were sitting in the Town Hall near at hand, and we atonce went over to have me bound apprentice to Joe in theMagisterial presence.  I say we went over, but I was pushed over byPumblechook, exactly as if I had that moment picked a pocket orfired a rick; indeed, it was the general impression in Court that Ihad been taken red-handed; for, as Pumblechook shoved me before himthrough the crowd, I heard some people say, "What's he done?" andothers, "He's a young 'un, too, but looks bad, don't he?  One personof mild and benevolent aspect even gave me a tract ornamented witha woodcut of a malevolent young man fitted up with a perfectsausage-shop of fetters, and entitled TO BE READ IN MY CELL.

The Hall was a queer place, I thought, with higher pews in it thana church,--and with people hanging over the pews looking on,--andwith mighty Justices (one with a powdered head) leaning back inchairs, with folded arms, or taking snuff, or going to sleep, orwriting, or reading the newspapers,--and with some shining blackportraits on the walls, which my unartistic eye regarded as acomposition of hardbake and sticking-plaster.  Here, in a cornermy indentures were duly signed and attested, and I was "bound"; Mr.Pumblechook holding me all the while as if we had looked in on ourway to the scaffold, to have those little preliminaries disposedof.

When we had come out again, and had got rid of the boys who hadbeen put into great spirits by the expectation of seeing mepublicly tortured, and who were much disappointed to find that myfriends were merely rallying round me, we went back toPumblechook's.  And there my sister became so excited by thetwenty-five guineas, that nothing would serve her but we must havea dinner out of that windfall at the Blue Boar, and thatPumblechook must go over in his chaise-cart, and bring the Hubblesand Mr. Wopsle.

It was agreed to be done; and a most melancholy day I passed.  For,it inscrutably appeared to stand to reason, in the minds of thewhole company, that I was an excrescence on the entertainment.  Andto make it worse, they all asked me from time to time,--in short,whenever they had nothing else to do,--why I didn't enjoy myself?And what could I possibly do then, but say I was enjoying myself,--when I wasn't!

However, they were grown up and had their own way, and they madethe most of it.  That swindling Pumblechook, exalted into thebeneficent contriver of the whole occasion, actually took the topof the table; and, when he addressed them on the subject of mybeing bound, and had fiendishly congratulated them on my beingliable to imprisonment if I played at cards, drank strong liquors,kept late hours or bad company, or indulged in other vagaries whichthe form of my indentures appeared to contemplate as next toinevitable, he placed me standing on a chair beside him toillustrate his remarks.

My only other remembrances of the great festival are, That theywouldn't let me go to sleep, but whenever they saw me dropping off,woke me up and told me to enjoy myself.  That, rather late in theevening Mr. Wopsle gave us Collins's ode, and threw his bloodstainedsword in thunder down, with such effect, that a waiter came in andsaid, "The Commercials underneath sent up their compliments, and itwasn't the Tumblers' Arms."  That, they were all in excellentspirits on the road home, and sang, O Lady Fair!  Mr. Wopsle takingthe bass, and asserting with a tremendously strong voice (in replyto the inquisitive bore who leads that piece of music in a mostimpertinent manner, by wanting to know all about everybody'sprivate affairs) that he was the man with his white locks flowing,and that he was upon the whole the weakest pilgrim going.

Finally, I remember that when I got into my little bedroom, I wastruly wretched, and had a strong conviction on me that I shouldnever like Joe's trade.  I had liked it once, but once was not now.

Chapter XIV

It is a most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home.  There may beblack ingratitude in the thing, and the punishment may beretributive and well deserved; but that it is a miserable thing, Ican testify.

Home had never been a very pleasant place to me, because of mysister's temper.  But, Joe had sanctified it, and I had believed init.  I had believed in the best parlor as a most elegant saloon; Ihad believed in the front door, as a mysterious portal of theTemple of State whose solemn opening was attended with a sacrificeof roast fowls; I had believed in the kitchen as a chaste thoughnot magnificent apartment; I had believed in the forge as theglowing road to manhood and independence.  Within a single year allthis was changed.  Now it was all coarse and common, and I wouldnot have had Miss Havisham and Estella see it on any account.

How much of my ungracious condition of mind may have been my ownfault, how much Miss Havisham's, how much my sister's, is now of nomoment to me or to any one.  The change was made in me; the thingwas done.  Well or ill done, excusably or inexcusably, it was done.

Once, it had seemed to me that when I should at last roll up myshirt-sleeves and go into the forge, Joe's 'prentice, I should bedistinguished and happy.  Now the reality was in my hold, I onlyfelt that I was dusty with the dust of small-coal, and that I had aweight upon my daily remembrance to which the anvil was a feather.There have been occasions in my later life (I suppose as in mostlives) when I have felt for a time as if a thick curtain had fallenon all its interest and romance, to shut me out from anything savedull endurance any more.  Never has that curtain dropped so heavyand blank, as when my way in life lay stretched out straight beforeme through the newly entered road of apprenticeship to Joe.

I remember that at a later period of my "time," I used to standabout the churchyard on Sunday evenings when night was falling,comparing my own perspective with the windy marsh view, and makingout some likeness between them by thinking how flat and low bothwere, and how on both there came an unknown way and a dark mist andthen the sea.  I was quite as dejected on the first working-day ofmy apprenticeship as in that after-time; but I am glad to know thatI never breathed a murmur to Joe while my indentures lasted.  It isabout the only thing I am glad to know of myself in thatconnection.

For, though it includes what I proceed to add, all the merit ofwhat I proceed to add was Joe's.  It was not because I was faithful,but because Joe was faithful, that I never ran away and went for asoldier or a sailor.  It was not because I had a strong sense of thevirtue of industry, but because Joe had a strong sense of thevirtue of industry, that I worked with tolerable zeal against thegrain.  It is not possible to know how far the influence of anyamiable honest-hearted duty-doing man flies out into the world; butit is very possible to know how it has touched one's self in goingby, and I know right well that any good that intermixed itselfwith my apprenticeship came of plain contented Joe, and not ofrestlessly aspiring discontented me.

What I wanted, who can say?  How can I say, when I never knew?  WhatI dreaded was, that in some unlucky hour I, being at my grimiestand commonest, should lift up my eyes and see Estella looking in atone of the wooden windows of the forge.  I was haunted by the fearthat she would, sooner or later, find me out, with a black face andhands, doing the coarsest part of my work, and would exult over meand despise me.  Often after dark, when I was pulling the bellowsfor Joe, and we were singing Old Clem, and when the thought how weused to sing it at Miss Havisham's would seem to show me Estella'sface in the fire, with her pretty hair fluttering in the wind andher eyes scorning me,--often at such a time I would look towardsthose panels of black night in the wall which the wooden windowsthen were, and would fancy that I saw her just drawing her faceaway, and would believe that she had come at last.

After that, when we went in to supper, the place and the meal wouldhave a more homely look than ever, and I would feel more ashamed ofhome than ever, in my own ungracious breast.

Chapter XV

As I was getting too big for Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt's room, myeducation under that preposterous female terminated.  Not, however,until Biddy had imparted to me everything she knew, from the littlecatalogue of prices, to a comic song she had once bought for ahalf-penny.  Although the only coherent part of the latter piece ofliterature were the opening lines,

When I went to Lunnon town sirs, Too rul loo rul Too rul loo rulWasn't I done very brown sirs?  Too rul loo rul Too rul loo rul

--still, in my desire to be wiser, I got this composition by heartwith the utmost gravity; nor do I recollect that I questioned itsmerit, except that I thought (as I still do) the amount of Too rulsomewhat in excess of the poetry.  In my hunger for information, Imade proposals to Mr. Wopsle to bestow some intellectual crumbs uponme, with which he kindly complied.  As it turned out, however, thathe only wanted me for a dramatic lay-figure, to be contradicted andembraced and wept over and bullied and clutched and stabbed andknocked about in a variety of ways, I soon declined that course ofinstruction; though not until Mr. Wopsle in his poetic fury hadseverely mauled me.

Whatever I acquired, I tried to impart to Joe.  This statementsounds so well, that I cannot in my conscience let it passunexplained.  I wanted to make Joe less ignorant and common, that hemight be worthier of my society and less open to Estella'sreproach.

The old Battery out on the marshes was our place of study, and abroken slate and a short piece of slate-pencil were our educationalimplements:  to which Joe always added a pipe of tobacco.  I neverknew Joe to remember anything from one Sunday to another, or toacquire, under my tuition, any piece of information whatever.  Yethe would smoke his pipe at the Battery with a far more sagaciousair than anywhere else,--even with a learned air,--as if heconsidered himself to be advancing immensely.  Dear fellow, I hopehe did.

It was pleasant and quiet, out there with the sails on the riverpassing beyond the earthwork, and sometimes, when the tide was low,looking as if they belonged to sunken ships that were still sailingon at the bottom of the water.  Whenever I watched the vesselsstanding out to sea with their white sails spread, I somehowthought of Miss Havisham and Estella; and whenever the light struckaslant, afar off, upon a cloud or sail or green hillside orwater-line, it was just the same.--Miss Havisham and Estella andthe strange house and the strange life appeared to have somethingto do with everything that was picturesque.

One Sunday when Joe, greatly enjoying his pipe, had so plumedhimself on being "most awful dull," that I had given him up for theday, I lay on the earthwork for some time with my chin on my hand,descrying traces of Miss Havisham and Estella all over theprospect, in the sky and in the water, until at last I resolved tomention a thought concerning them that had been much in my head.

"Joe," said I; "don't you think I ought to make Miss Havisham avisit?"

"Well, Pip," returned Joe, slowly considering.  "What for?"

"What for, Joe?  What is any visit made for?"

"There is some wisits p'r'aps," said Joe, "as for ever remainsopen to the question, Pip.  But in regard to wisiting Miss Havisham.She might think you wanted something,--expected something of her."

"Don't you think I might say that I did not, Joe?"

"You might, old chap," said Joe.  "And she might credit it.Similarly she mightn't."

Joe felt, as I did, that he had made a point there, and he pulledhard at his pipe to keep himself from weakening it by repetition.

"You see, Pip," Joe pursued, as soon as he was past that danger,"Miss Havisham done the handsome thing by you.  When Miss Havishamdone the handsome thing by you, she called me back to say to me asthat were all."

"Yes, Joe.  I heard her."

"ALL," Joe repeated, very emphatically.

"Yes, Joe.  I tell you, I heard her."

"Which I meantersay, Pip, it might be that her meaning were,--Makea end on it!--As you was!--Me to the North, and you to the South!--Keep in sunders!"

I had thought of that too, and it was very far from comforting tome to find that he had thought of it; for it seemed to render itmore probable.

"But, Joe."

"Yes, old chap."

"Here am I, getting on in the first year of my time, and, since theday of my being bound, I have never thanked Miss Havisham, or askedafter her, or shown that I remember her."

"That's true, Pip; and unless you was to turn her out a set ofshoes all four round,--and which I meantersay as even a set ofshoes all four round might not be acceptable as a present, in atotal wacancy of hoofs--"

"I don't mean that sort of remembrance, Joe; I don't mean apresent."

But Joe had got the idea of a present in his head and must harpupon it.  "Or even," said he, "if you was helped to knocking her upa new chain for the front door,--or say a gross or two ofshark-headed screws for general use,--or some light fancy article,such as a toasting-fork when she took her muffins,--or a gridironwhen she took a sprat or such like--"

"I don't mean any present at all, Joe," I interposed.

"Well," said Joe, still harping on it as though I had particularlypressed it, "if I was yourself, Pip, I wouldn't.  No, I would not.For what's a door-chain when she's got one always up?  Andshark-headers is open to misrepresentations.  And if it was atoasting-fork, you'd go into brass and do yourself no credit.  Andthe oncommonest workman can't show himself oncommon in a gridiron,--for a gridiron IS a gridiron," said Joe, steadfastly impressing itupon me, as if he were endeavouring to rouse me from a fixeddelusion, "and you may haim at what you like, but a gridiron itwill come out, either by your leave or again your leave, and youcan't help yourself--"

"My dear Joe," I cried, in desperation, taking hold of his coat,"don't go on in that way.  I never thought of making Miss Havishamany present."

"No, Pip," Joe assented, as if he had been contending for that, allalong; "and what I say to you is, you are right, Pip."

"Yes, Joe; but what I wanted to say, was, that as we are ratherslack just now, if you would give me a half-holiday to-morrow, Ithink I would go up-town and make a call on Miss Est--Havisham."

"Which her name," said Joe, gravely, "ain't Estavisham, Pip, unlessshe have been rechris'ened."

"I know, Joe, I know.  It was a slip of mine.  What do you think ofit, Joe?"

In brief, Joe thought that if I thought well of it, he thought wellof it.  But, he was particular in stipulating that if I were notreceived with cordiality, or if I were not encouraged to repeat myvisit as a visit which had no ulterior object but was simply one ofgratitude for a favor received, then this experimental trip shouldhave no successor.  By these conditions I promised to abide.

Now, Joe kept a journeyman at weekly wages whose name was Orlick.He pretended that his Christian name was Dolge,--a clearImpossibility,--but he was a fellow of that obstinate dispositionthat I believe him to have been the prey of no delusion in thisparticular, but wilfully to have imposed that name upon the villageas an affront to its understanding.  He was a broadshoulderedloose-limbed swarthy fellow of great strength, never in a hurry,and always slouching.  He never even seemed to come to his work onpurpose, but would slouch in as if by mere accident; and when hewent to the Jolly Bargemen to eat his dinner, or went away atnight, he would slouch out, like Cain or the Wandering Jew, as ifhe had no idea where he was going and no intention of ever comingback.  He lodged at a sluice-keeper's out on the marshes, and onworking-days would come slouching from his hermitage, with hishands in his pockets and his dinner loosely tied in a bundle roundhis neck and dangling on his back.  On Sundays he mostly lay all dayon the sluice-gates, or stood against ricks and barns.  He alwaysslouched, locomotively, with his eyes on the ground; and, whenaccosted or otherwise required to raise them, he looked up in ahalf-resentful, half-puzzled way, as though the only thought heever had was, that it was rather an odd and injurious fact that heshould never be thinking.

This morose journeyman had no liking for me.  When I was very smalland timid, he gave me to understand that the Devil lived in a blackcorner of the forge, and that he knew the fiend very well:  alsothat it was necessary to make up the fire, once in seven years,with a live boy, and that I might consider myself fuel.  When Ibecame Joe's 'prentice, Orlick was perhaps confirmed in somesuspicion that I should displace him; howbeit, he liked me stillless.  Not that he ever said anything, or did anything, openlyimporting hostility; I only noticed that he always beat his sparksin my direction, and that whenever I sang Old Clem, he came in outof time.

Dolge Orlick was at work and present, next day, when I reminded Joeof my half-holiday.  He said nothing at the moment, for he and Joehad just got a piece of hot iron between them, and I was at thebellows; but by and by he said, leaning on his hammer,--

"Now, master!  Sure you're not a going to favor only one of us.  IfYoung Pip has a half-holiday, do as much for Old Orlick."  I supposehe was about five-and-twenty, but he usually spoke of himself as anancient person.

"Why, what'll you do with a half-holiday, if you get it?" said Joe.

"What'll I do with it!  What'll he do with it?  I'll do as much withit as him," said Orlick.

"As to Pip, he's going up town," said Joe.

"Well then, as to Old Orlick, he's a going up town," retorted thatworthy.  "Two can go up town.  Tain't only one wot can go up town.

"Don't lose your temper," said Joe.

"Shall if I like," growled Orlick.  "Some and their up-towning!  Now,master!  Come.  No favoring in this shop.  Be a man!"

The master refusing to entertain the subject until the journeymanwas in a better temper, Orlick plunged at the furnace, drew out ared-hot bar, made at me with it as if he were going to run itthrough my body, whisked it round my head, laid it on the anvil,hammered it out,--as if it were I, I thought, and the sparks weremy spirting blood,--and finally said, when he had hammered himselfhot and the iron cold, and he again leaned on his hammer,--

"Now, master!"

"Are you all right now?" demanded Joe.

"Ah!  I am all right," said gruff Old Orlick.

"Then, as in general you stick to your work as well as most men,"said Joe, "let it be a half-holiday for all."

My sister had been standing silent in the yard, within hearing,--she was a most unscrupulous spy and listener,--and she instantlylooked in at one of the windows.

"Like you, you fool!" said she to Joe, "giving holidays to greatidle hulkers like that.  You are a rich man, upon my life, to wastewages in that way.  I wish I was his master!"

"You'd be everybody's master, if you durst," retorted Orlick, withan ill-favored grin.

("Let her alone," said Joe.)

"I'd be a match for all noodles and all rogues," returned mysister, beginning to work herself into a mighty rage.  "And Icouldn't be a match for the noodles, without being a match for yourmaster, who's the dunder-headed king of the noodles.  And I couldn'tbe a match for the rogues, without being a match for you, who arethe blackest-looking and the worst rogue between this and France.Now!"

"You're a foul shrew, Mother Gargery, growled the journeyman.  "Ifthat makes a judge of rogues, you ought to be a good'un."

("Let her alone, will you?" said Joe.)

"What did you say?" cried my sister, beginning to scream.  "What didyou say?  What did that fellow Orlick say to me, Pip?  What did hecall me, with my husband standing by?  Oh! oh! oh!"  Each of theseexclamations was a shriek; and I must remark of my sister, what isequally true of all the violent women I have ever seen, thatpassion was no excuse for her, because it is undeniable thatinstead of lapsing into passion, she consciously and deliberatelytook extraordinary pains to force herself into it, and becameblindly furious by regular stages; "what was the name he gave mebefore the base man who swore to defend me?   Oh!  Hold me!  Oh!"

"Ah-h-h!" growled the journeyman, between his teeth, "I'd hold you,if you was my wife.  I'd hold you under the pump, and choke it outof you."

("I tell you, let her alone," said Joe.)

"Oh!  To hear him!" cried my sister, with a clap of her hands and ascream together,--which was her next stage.  "To hear the names he'sgiving me!  That Orlick!  In my own house!  Me, a married woman!  Withmy husband standing by!  Oh! Oh!"  Here my sister, after a fit ofclappings and screamings, beat her hands upon her bosom and uponher knees, and threw her cap off, and pulled her hair down,--whichwere the last stages on her road to frenzy.  Being by this time aperfect Fury and a complete success, she made a dash at the doorwhich I had fortunately locked.

What could the wretched Joe do now, after his disregardedparenthetical interruptions, but stand up to his journeyman, andask him what he meant by interfering betwixt himself and Mrs. Joe;and further whether he was man enough to come on?  Old Orlick feltthat the situation admitted of nothing less than coming on, and wason his defence straightway; so, without so much as pulling offtheir singed and burnt aprons, they went at one another, like twogiants.  But, if any man in that neighborhood could stand uplongagainst Joe, I never saw the man.  Orlick, as if he had been of nomore account than the pale young gentleman, was very soon among thecoal-dust, and in no hurry to come out of it.  Then Joe unlockedthe door and picked up my sister, who had dropped insensible at thewindow (but who had seen the fight first, I think), and who wascarried into the house and laid down, and who was recommended torevive, and would do nothing but struggle and clench her hands inJoe's hair.  Then, came that singular calm and silence which succeedall uproars; and then, with the vague sensation which I have alwaysconnected with such a lull,--namely, that it was Sunday, andsomebody was dead,--I went up stairs to dress myself.

When I came down again, I found Joe and Orlick sweeping up, withoutany other traces of discomposure than a slit in one of Orlick'snostrils, which was neither expressive nor ornamental.  A pot ofbeer had appeared from the Jolly Bargemen, and they were sharing itby turns in a peaceable manner.  The lull had a sedative andphilosophical influence on Joe, who followed me out into the roadto say, as a parting observation that might do me good, "On theRampage, Pip, and off the Rampage, Pip:--such is Life!"

With what absurd emotions (for we think the feelings that are veryserious in a man quite comical in a boy) I found myself again goingto Miss Havisham's, matters little here.  Nor, how I passed andrepassed the gate many times before I could make up my mind toring.  Nor, how I debated whether I should go away without ringing;nor, how I should undoubtedly have gone, if my time had been myown, to come back.

Miss Sarah Pocket came to the gate.  No Estella.

"How, then?  You here again?" said Miss Pocket.  "What do you want?"

When I said that I only came to see how Miss Havisham was, Sarahevidently deliberated whether or no she should send me about mybusiness.  But unwilling to hazard the responsibility, she let mein, and presently brought the sharp message that I was to "comeup."

Everything was unchanged, and Miss Havisham was alone.

"Well?" said she, fixing her eyes upon me.  "I hope you wantnothing?  You'll get nothing."

"No indeed, Miss Havisham.  I only wanted you to know that I amdoing very well in my apprenticeship, and am always much obliged toyou."

"There, there!" with the old restless fingers.  "Come now and then;come on your birthday.--Ay!" she cried suddenly, turning herselfand her chair towards me, "You are looking round for Estella?  Hey?"

I had been looking round,--in fact, for Estella,--and I stammeredthat I hoped she was well.

"Abroad," said Miss Havisham; "educating for a lady; far out ofreach; prettier than ever; admired by all who see her.  Do you feelthat you have lost her?"

There was such a malignant enjoyment in her utterance of the lastwords, and she broke into such a disagreeable laugh, that I was ata loss what to say.  She spared me the trouble of considering, bydismissing me.  When the gate was closed upon me by Sarah of thewalnut-shell countenance, I felt more than ever dissatisfied withmy home and with my trade and with everything; and that was all Itook by that motion.

As I was loitering along the High Street, looking in disconsolatelyat the shop windows, and thinking what I would buy if I were agentleman, who should come out of the bookshop but Mr. Wopsle.  Mr.Wopsle had in his hand the affecting tragedy of George Barnwell, inwhich he had that moment invested sixpence, with the view ofheaping every word of it on the head of Pumblechook, with whom hewas going to drink tea.  No sooner did he see me, than he appearedto consider that a special Providence had put a 'prentice in hisway to be read at; and he laid hold of me, and insisted on myaccompanying him to the Pumblechookian parlor.  As I knew it wouldbe miserable at home, and as the nights were dark and the way wasdreary, and almost any companionship on the road was better thannone, I made no great resistance; consequently, we turned intoPumblechook's just as the street and the shops were lighting up.

As I never assisted at any other representation of George Barnwell,I don't know how long it may usually take; but I know very wellthat it took until half-past nine o' clock that night, and thatwhen Mr. Wopsle got into Newgate, I thought he never would go to thescaffold, he became so much slower than at any former period of hisdisgraceful career.  I thought it a little too much that he shouldcomplain of being cut short in his flower after all, as if he hadnot been running to seed, leaf after leaf, ever since his coursebegan.  This, however, was a mere question of length andwearisomeness.  What stung me, was the identification of the wholeaffair with my unoffending self.  When Barnwell began to go wrong, Ideclare that I felt positively apologetic, Pumblechook's indignantstare so taxed me with it.  Wopsle, too, took pains to present me inthe worst light.  At once ferocious and maudlin, I was made tomurder my uncle with no extenuating circumstances whatever;Millwood put me down in argument, on every occasion; it becamesheer monomania in my master's daughter to care a button for me;and all I can say for my gasping and procrastinating conduct on thefatal morning, is, that it was worthy of the general feebleness ofmy character.  Even after I was happily hanged and Wopsle had closedthe book, Pumblechook sat staring at me, and shaking his head, andsaying, "Take warning, boy, take warning!" as if it were awell-known fact that I contemplated murdering a near relation,provided I could only induce one to have the weakness to become mybenefactor.

It was a very dark night when it was all over, and when I set outwith Mr. Wopsle on the walk home.  Beyond town, we found a heavymist out, and it fell wet and thick.  The turnpike lamp was a blur,quite out of the lamp's usual place apparently, and its rays lookedsolid substance on the fog.  We were noticing this, and saying howthat the mist rose with a change of wind from a certain quarter ofour marshes, when we came upon a man, slouching under the lee ofthe turnpike house.

"Halloa!" we said, stopping.  "Orlick there?"

"Ah!" he answered, slouching out.  "I was standing by a minute, onthe chance of company."

"You are late," I remarked.

Orlick not unnaturally answered, "Well?  And you're late."

"We have been," said Mr. Wopsle, exalted with his late performance,--"we have been indulging, Mr. Orlick, in an intellectual evening."

Old Orlick growled, as if he had nothing to say about that, and weall went on together.  I asked him presently whether he had beenspending his half-holiday up and down town?

"Yes," said he, "all of it.  I come in behind yourself.  I didn't seeyou, but I must have been pretty close behind you.  By the by, theguns is going again."

"At the Hulks?" said I.

"Ay!  There's some of the birds flown from the cages.  The guns havebeen going since dark, about.  You'll hear one presently."

In effect, we had not walked many yards further, when thewell-remembered boom came towards us, deadened by the mist, andheavily rolled away along the low grounds by the river, as if itwere pursuing and threatening the fugitives.

"A good night for cutting off in," said Orlick.  "We'd be puzzledhow to bring down a jail-bird on the wing, to-night."

The subject was a suggestive one to me, and I thought about it insilence.  Mr. Wopsle, as the ill-requited uncle of the evening'stragedy, fell to meditating aloud in his garden at Camberwell.Orlick, with his hands in his pockets, slouched heavily at my side.It was very dark, very wet, very muddy, and so we splashed along.Now and then, the sound of the signal cannon broke upon us again,and again rolled sulkily along the course of the river.  I keptmyself to myself and my thoughts.  Mr. Wopsle died amiably atCamberwell, and exceedingly game on Bosworth Field, and in thegreatest agonies at Glastonbury.  Orlick sometimes growled, "Beat itout, beat it out,--Old Clem!  With a clink for the stout,--OldClem!"  I thought he had been drinking, but he was not drunk.

Thus, we came to the village.  The way by which we approached ittook us past the Three Jolly Bargemen, which we were surprised tofind--it being eleven o'clock --in a state of commotion, with thedoor wide open, and unwonted lights that had been hastily caught upand put down scattered about.  Mr. Wopsle dropped in to ask what wasthe matter (surmising that a convict had been taken), but camerunning out in a great hurry.

"There's something wrong," said he, without stopping, "up at yourplace, Pip.  Run all!"

"What is it?" I asked, keeping up with him.  So did Orlick, at myside.

"I can't quite understand.  The house seems to have been violentlyentered when Joe Gargery was out.  Supposed by convicts.  Somebodyhas been attacked and hurt."

We were running too fast to admit of more being said, and we madeno stop until we got into our kitchen.  It was full of people; thewhole village was there, or in the yard; and there was a surgeon,and there was Joe, and there were a group of women, all on the floorin the midst of the kitchen.  The unemployed bystanders drew backwhen they saw me, and so I became aware of my sister,--lyingwithout sense or movement on the bare boards where she had beenknocked down by a tremendous blow on the back of the head, dealt bysome unknown hand when her face was turned towards the fire,--destined never to be on the Rampage again, while she was the wifeof Joe.

Chapter XVI

With my head full of George Barnwell, I was at first disposed tobelieve that I must have had some hand in the attack upon mysister, or at all events that as her near relation, popularly knownto be under obligations to her, I was a more legitimate object ofsuspicion than any one else.  But when, in the clearer light of nextmorning, I began to reconsider the matter and to hear it discussedaround me on all sides, I took another view of the case, which wasmore reasonable.

Joe had been at the Three Jolly Bargemen, smoking his pipe, from aquarter after eight o'clock to a quarter before ten.  While he wasthere, my sister had been seen standing at the kitchen door, andhad exchanged Good Night with a farm-laborer going home.  The mancould not be more particular as to the time at which he saw her (hegot into dense confusion when he tried to be), than that it musthave been before nine.  When Joe went home at five minutes beforeten, he found her struck down on the floor, and promptly called inassistance.  The fire had not then burnt unusually low, nor was thesnuff of the candle very long; the candle, however, had been blownout.

Nothing had been taken away from any part of the house.  Neither,beyond the blowing out of the candle,--which stood on a tablebetween the door and my sister, and was behind her when she stoodfacing the fire and was struck,--was there any disarrangement ofthe kitchen, excepting such as she herself had made, in falling andbleeding.  But, there was one remarkable piece of evidence on thespot.  She had been struck with something blunt and heavy, on thehead and spine; after the blows were dealt, something heavy hadbeen thrown down at her with considerable violence, as she lay onher face.  And on the ground beside her, when Joe picked her up, wasa convict's leg-iron which had been filed asunder.

Now, Joe, examining this iron with a smith's eye, declared it tohave been filed asunder some time ago.  The hue and cry going off tothe Hulks, and people coming thence to examine the iron, Joe'sopinion was corroborated.  They did not undertake to say when it hadleft the prison-ships to which it undoubtedly had once belonged;but they claimed to know for certain that that particular manaclehad not been worn by either of the two convicts who had escaped lastnight.  Further, one of those two was already retaken, and had notfreed himself of his iron.

Knowing what I knew, I set up an inference of my own here.  Ibelieved the iron to be my convict's iron,--the iron I had seen andheard him filing at, on the marshes,--but my mind did not accusehim of having put it to its latest use.  For I believed one of twoother persons to have become possessed of it, and to have turned itto this cruel account.  Either Orlick, or the strange man who hadshown me the file.

Now, as to Orlick; he had gone to town exactly as he told us whenwe picked him up at the turnpike, he had been seen about town allthe evening, he had been in divers companies in severalpublic-houses, and he had come back with myself and Mr. Wopsle.There was nothing against him, save the quarrel; and my sister hadquarrelled with him, and with everybody else about her, tenthousand times.  As to the strange man; if he had come back for histwo bank-notes there could have been no dispute about them, becausemy sister was fully prepared to restore them.  Besides, there hadbeen no altercation; the assailant had come in so silently andsuddenly, that she had been felled before she could look round.

It was horrible to think that I had provided the weapon, howeverundesignedly, but I could hardly think otherwise.  I sufferedunspeakable trouble while I considered and reconsidered whether Ishould at last dissolve that spell of my childhood and tell Joeall the story.  For months afterwards, I every day settled thequestion finally in the negative, and reopened and reargued it nextmorning.  The contention came, after all, to this;--the secret wassuch an old one now, had so grown into me and become a part ofmyself, that I could not tear it away.  In addition to the dreadthat, having led up to so much mischief, it would be now morelikely than ever to alienate Joe from me if he believed it, I had afurther restraining dread that he would not believe it, but wouldassort it with the fabulous dogs and veal-cutlets as a monstrousinvention.  However, I temporized with myself, of course--for, wasI not wavering between right and wrong, when the thing is alwaysdone?--and resolved to make a full disclosure if I should see anysuch new occasion as a new chance of helping in the discovery ofthe assailant.

The Constables and the Bow Street men from London--for, thishappened in the days of the extinct red-waistcoated police--wereabout the house for a week or two, and did pretty much what I haveheard and read of like authorities doing in other such cases.  Theytook up several obviously wrong people, and they ran their headsvery hard against wrong ideas, and persisted in trying to fit thecircumstances to the ideas, instead of trying to extract ideas fromthe circumstances.  Also, they stood about the door of the JollyBargemen, with knowing and reserved looks that filled the wholeneighborhood with admiration; and they had a mysterious manner oftaking their drink, that was almost as good as taking the culprit.But not quite, for they never did it.

Long after these constitutional powers had dispersed, my sister layvery ill in bed.  Her sight was disturbed, so that she saw objectsmultiplied, and grasped at visionary teacups and wineglassesinstead of the realities; her hearing was greatly impaired; hermemory also; and her speech was unintelligible.  When, at last, shecame round so far as to be helped down stairs, it was stillnecessary to keep my slate always by her, that she might indicatein writing what she could not indicate in speech.  As she was (verybad handwriting apart) a more than indifferent speller, and as Joewas a more than indifferent reader, extraordinary complicationsarose between them which I was always called in to solve.  Theadministration of mutton instead of medicine, the substitution ofTea for Joe, and the baker for bacon, were among the mildest of myown mistakes.

However, her temper was greatly improved, and she was patient.  Atremulous uncertainty of the action of all her limbs soon became apart of her regular state, and afterwards, at intervals of two orthree months, she would often put her hands to her head, and wouldthen remain for about a week at a time in some gloomy aberration ofmind.  We were at a loss to find a suitable attendant for her, untila circumstance happened conveniently to relieve us.  Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt conquered a confirmed habit of living into which she hadfallen, and Biddy became a part of our establishment.

It may have been about a month after my sister's reappearance inthe kitchen, when Biddy came to us with a small speckled boxcontaining the whole of her worldly effects, and became a blessingto the household.  Above all, she was a blessing to Joe, for thedear old fellow was sadly cut up by the constant contemplation ofthe wreck of his wife, and had been accustomed, while attending onher of an evening, to turn to me every now and then and say, withhis blue eyes moistened, "Such a fine figure of a woman as she oncewere, Pip!"  Biddy instantly taking the cleverest charge of her asthough she had studied her from infancy; Joe became able in somesort to appreciate the greater quiet of his life, and to get downto the Jolly Bargemen now and then for a change that did him good.It was characteristic of the police people that they had all moreor less suspected poor Joe (though he never knew it), and that theyhad to a man concurred in regarding him as one of the deepestspirits they had ever encountered.

Biddy's first triumph in her new office, was to solve a difficultythat had completely vanquished me.  I had tried hard at it, but hadmade nothing of it.  Thus it was:--

Again and again and again, my sister had traced upon the slate, acharacter that looked like a curious T, and then with the utmosteagerness had called our attention to it as something sheparticularly wanted.  I had in vain tried everything producible thatbegan with a T, from tar to toast and tub.  At length it had comeinto my head that the sign looked like a hammer, and on my lustilycalling that word in my sister's ear, she had begun to hammer onthe table and had expressed a qualified assent.  Thereupon, I hadbrought in all our hammers, one after another, but without avail.Then I bethought me of a crutch, the shape being much the same, andI borrowed one in the village, and displayed it to my sister withconsiderable confidence.  But she shook her head to that extent whenshe was shown it, that we were terrified lest in her weak andshattered state she should dislocate her neck.

When my sister found that Biddy was very quick to understand her,this mysterious sign reappeared on the slate.  Biddy lookedthoughtfully at it, heard my explanation, looked thoughtfully at mysister, looked thoughtfully at Joe (who was always represented onthe slate by his initial letter), and ran into the forge, followedby Joe and me.

"Why, of course!" cried Biddy, with an exultant face.  "Don't yousee?  It's him!"

Orlick, without a doubt!  She had lost his name, and could onlysignify him by his hammer.  We told him why we wanted him to comeinto the kitchen, and he slowly laid down his hammer, wiped hisbrow with his arm, took another wipe at it with his apron, and cameslouching out, with a curious loose vagabond bend in the knees thatstrongly distinguished him.

I confess that I expected to see my sister denounce him, and that Iwas disappointed by the different result.  She manifested thegreatest anxiety to be on good terms with him, was evidently muchpleased by his being at length produced, and motioned that shewould have him given something to drink.  She watched hiscountenance as if she were particularly wishful to be assured thathe took kindly to his reception, she showed every possible desireto conciliate him, and there was an air of humble propitiation inall she did, such as I have seen pervade the bearing of a childtowards a hard master.  After that day, a day rarely passed withouther drawing the hammer on her slate, and without Orlick's slouchingin and standing doggedly before her, as if he knew no more than Idid what to make of it.

Chapter XVII

I now fell into a regular routine of apprenticeship life, which wasvaried beyond the limits of the village and the marshes, by nomore remarkable circumstance than the arrival of my birthday and mypaying another visit to Miss Havisham.  I found Miss Sarah Pocketstill on duty at the gate; I found Miss Havisham just as I had lefther, and she spoke of Estella in the very same way, if not in thevery same words.  The interview lasted but a few minutes, and shegave me a guinea when I was going, and told me to come again on mynext birthday.  I may mention at once that this became an annualcustom.  I tried to decline taking the guinea on the first occasion,but with no better effect than causing her to ask me very angrily,if I expected more?  Then, and after that, I took it.

So unchanging was the dull old house, the yellow light in thedarkened room, the faded spectre in the chair by the dressing-tableglass, that I felt as if the stopping of the clocks had stoppedTime in that mysterious place, and, while I and everything elseoutside it grew older, it stood still.  Daylight never entered thehouse as to my thoughts and remembrances of it, any more than as tothe actual fact.  It bewildered me, and under its influence Icontinued at heart to hate my trade and to be ashamed of home.

Imperceptibly I became conscious of a change in Biddy, however.  Hershoes came up at the heel, her hair grew bright and neat, her handswere always clean.  She was not beautiful,--she was common, andcould not be like Estella,--but she was pleasant and wholesome andsweet-tempered.  She had not been with us more than a year (Iremember her being newly out of mourning at the time it struck me),when I observed to myself one evening that she had curiouslythoughtful and attentive eyes; eyes that were very pretty and verygood.

It came of my lifting up my own eyes from a task I was poring at--writing some passages from a book, to improve myself in two ways atonce by a sort of stratagem--and seeing Biddy observant of what Iwas about.  I laid down my pen, and Biddy stopped in her needleworkwithout laying it down.

"Biddy," said I, "how do you manage it?  Either I am very stupid, oryou are very clever."

"What is it that I manage?  I don't know," returned Biddy, smiling.

She managed our whole domestic life, and wonderfully too; but I didnot mean that, though that made what I did mean more surprising.

"How do you manage, Biddy," said I, "to learn everything that Ilearn, and always to keep up with me?"  I was beginning to be rathervain of my knowledge, for I spent my birthday guineas on it, andset aside the greater part of my pocket-money for similarinvestment; though I have no doubt, now, that the little I knew wasextremely dear at the price.

"I might as well ask you," said Biddy, "how you manage?"

"No; because when I come in from the forge of a night, any one cansee me turning to at it.  But you never turn to at it, Biddy."

"I suppose I must catch it like a cough," said Biddy, quietly;and went on with her sewing.

Pursuing my idea as I leaned back in my wooden chair, and looked atBiddy sewing away with her head on one side, I began to think herrather an extraordinary girl.  For I called to mind now, that shewas equally accomplished in the terms of our trade, and the namesof our different sorts of work, and our various tools.  In short,whatever I knew, Biddy knew.  Theoretically, she was already as gooda blacksmith as I, or better.

"You are one of those, Biddy," said I, "who make the most of everychance.  You never had a chance before you came here, and see howimproved you are!"

Biddy looked at me for an instant, and went on with her sewing.  "Iwas your first teacher though; wasn't I?" said she, as she sewed.

"Biddy!" I exclaimed, in amazement.  "Why, you are crying!"

"No I am not," said Biddy, looking up and laughing.  "What put thatin your head?"

What could have put it in my head but the glistening of a tear asit dropped on her work?  I sat silent, recalling what a drudge shehad been until Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt successfully overcame thatbad habit of living, so highly desirable to be got rid of by somepeople.  I recalled the hopeless circumstances by which she had beensurrounded in the miserable little shop and the miserable littlenoisy evening school, with that miserable old bundle ofincompetence always to be dragged and shouldered.  I reflected thateven in those untoward times there must have been latent in Biddywhat was now developing, for, in my first uneasiness and discontentI had turned to her for help, as a matter of course.  Biddy satquietly sewing, shedding no more tears, and while I looked at herand thought about it all, it occurred to me that perhaps I had notbeen sufficiently grateful to Biddy.  I might have been tooreserved, and should have patronized her more (though I did not usethat precise word in my meditations) with my confidence.

"Yes, Biddy," I observed, when I had done turning it over, "youwere my first teacher, and that at a time when we little thought ofever being together like this, in this kitchen."

"Ah, poor thing!" replied Biddy.  It was like herself-forgetfulness to transfer the remark to my sister, and to getup and be busy about her, making her more comfortable; "that'ssadly true!"

"Well!" said I, "we must talk together a little more, as we used todo.  And I must consult you a little more, as I used to do.  Let ushave a quiet walk on the marshes next Sunday, Biddy, and a longchat."

My sister was never left alone now; but Joe more than readilyundertook the care of her on that Sunday afternoon, and Biddy and Iwent out together.  It was summer-time, and lovely weather.  When wehad passed the village and the church and the churchyard, and wereout on the marshes and began to see the sails of the ships as theysailed on, I began to combine Miss Havisham and Estella with theprospect, in my usual way.  When we came to the river-side and satdown on the bank, with the water rippling at our feet, making itall more quiet than it would have been without that sound, Iresolved that it was a good time and place for the admission ofBiddy into my inner confidence.

"Biddy," said I, after binding her to secrecy, "I want to be agentleman."

"O, I wouldn't, if I was you!" she returned.  "I don't think itwould answer."

"Biddy," said I, with some severity, "I have particular reasons forwanting to be a gentleman."

"You know best, Pip; but don't you think you are happier as youare?"

"Biddy," I exclaimed, impatiently, "I am not at all happy as I am.I am disgusted with my calling and with my life.  I have never takento either, since I was bound.  Don't be absurd."

"Was I absurd?" said Biddy, quietly raising her eyebrows; "I amsorry for that; I didn't mean to be.  I only want you to do well,and to be comfortable."

"Well, then, understand once for all that I never shall or can becomfortable--or anything but miserable--there, Biddy!--unless Ican lead a very different sort of life from the life I lead now."

"That's a pity!" said Biddy, shaking her head with a sorrowful air.

Now, I too had so often thought it a pity, that, in the singularkind of quarrel with myself which I was always carrying on, I washalf inclined to shed tears of vexation and distress when Biddygave utterance to her sentiment and my own.  I told her she wasright, and I knew it was much to be regretted, but still it was notto be helped.

"If I could have settled down," I said to Biddy, plucking up theshort grass within reach, much as I had once upon a time pulled myfeelings out of my hair and kicked them into the brewery wall,--"ifI could have settled down and been but half as fond of the forge asI was when I was little, I know it would have been much better forme.  You and I and Joe would have wanted nothing then, and Joe and Iwould perhaps have gone partners when I was out of my time, and Imight even have grown up to keep company with you, and we mighthave sat on this very bank on a fine Sunday, quite differentpeople.  I should have been good enough for you; shouldn't I,Biddy?"

Biddy sighed as she looked at the ships sailing on, and returnedfor answer, "Yes; I am not over-particular."  It scarcely soundedflattering, but I knew she meant well.

"Instead of that," said I, plucking up more grass and chewing ablade or two, "see how I am going on.  Dissatisfied, anduncomfortable, and--what would it signify to me, being coarse andcommon, if nobody had told me so!"

Biddy turned her face suddenly towards mine, and looked far moreattentively at me than she had looked at the sailing ships.

"It was neither a very true nor a very polite thing to say," sheremarked, directing her eyes to the ships again.  "Who said it?"

I was disconcerted, for I had broken away without quite seeingwhere I was going to.  It was not to be shuffled off now, however,and I answered, "The beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham's, andshe's more beautiful than anybody ever was, and I admire herdreadfully, and I want to be a gentleman on her account."  Havingmade this lunatic confession, I began to throw my torn-up grassinto the river, as if I had some thoughts of following it.

"Do you want to be a gentleman, to spite her or to gain her over?"Biddy quietly asked me, after a pause.

"I don't know," I moodily answered.

"Because, if it is to spite her," Biddy pursued, "I should think--but you know best--that might be better and more independentlydone by caring nothing for her words.  And if it is to gain herover, I should think--but you know best--she was not worthgaining over."

Exactly what I myself had thought, many times.  Exactly what wasperfectly manifest to me at the moment.  But how could I, a poordazed village lad, avoid that wonderful inconsistency into whichthe best and wisest of men fall every day?

"It may be all quite true," said I to Biddy, "but I admire herdreadfully."

In short, I turned over on my face when I came to that, and got agood grasp on the hair on each side of my head, and wrenched itwell.  All the while knowing the madness of my heart to be so verymad and misplaced, that I was quite conscious it would have servedmy face right, if I had lifted it up by my hair, and knocked itagainst the pebbles as a punishment for belonging to such an idiot.

Biddy was the wisest of girls, and she tried to reason no more withme.  She put her hand, which was a comfortable hand though roughenedby work, upon my hands, one after another, and gently took them outof my hair.  Then she softly patted my shoulder in a soothing way,while with my face upon my sleeve I cried a little,--exactly as Ihad done in the brewery yard,--and felt vaguely convinced that Iwas very much ill-used by somebody, or by everybody; I can't saywhich.

"I am glad of one thing," said Biddy, "and that is, that you havefelt you could give me your confidence, Pip.  And I am glad ofanother thing, and that is, that of course you know you may dependupon my keeping it and always so far deserving it.  If your firstteacher (dear! such a poor one, and so much in need of being taughtherself!) had been your teacher at the present time, she thinks sheknows what lesson she would set.  But it would be a hard one tolearn, and you have got beyond her, and it's of no use now."  So,with a quiet sigh for me, Biddy rose from the bank, and said, witha fresh and pleasant change of voice, "Shall we walk a littlefarther, or go home?"

"Biddy," I cried, getting up, putting my arm round her neck, andgiving her a kiss, "I shall always tell you everything."

"Till you're a gentleman," said Biddy.

"You know I never shall be, so that's always.  Not that I have anyoccasion to tell you anything, for you know everything I know,--asI told you at home the other night."

"Ah!" said Biddy, quite in a whisper, as she looked away at theships.  And then repeated, with her former pleasant change, "shallwe walk a little farther, or go home?"

I said to Biddy we would walk a little farther, and we did so, andthe summer afternoon toned down into the summer evening, and it wasvery beautiful.  I began to consider whether I was not morenaturally and wholesomely situated, after all, in thesecircumstances, than playing beggar my neighbor by candle-light inthe room with the stopped clocks, and being despised by Estella.  Ithought it would be very good for me if I could get her out of myhead, with all the rest of those remembrances and fancies, andcould go to work determined to relish what I had to do, and stickto it, and make the best of it.  I asked myself the question whetherI did not surely know that if Estella were beside me at that momentinstead of Biddy, she would make me miserable?  I was obliged toadmit that I did know it for a certainty, and I said to myself,"Pip, what a fool you are!"

We talked a good deal as we walked, and all that Biddy said seemedright.  Biddy was never insulting, or capricious, or Biddy to-dayand somebody else to-morrow; she would have derived only pain, andno pleasure, from giving me pain; she would far rather have woundedher own breast than mine.  How could it be, then, that I did notlike her much the better of the two?

"Biddy," said I, when we were walking homeward, "I wish you couldput me right."

"I wish I could!" said Biddy.

"If I could only get myself to fall in love with you,--you don'tmind my speaking so openly to such an old acquaintance?"

"Oh dear, not at all!" said Biddy.  "Don't mind me."

"If I could only get myself to do it, that would be the thing forme."

"But you never will, you see," said Biddy.

It did not appear quite so unlikely to me that evening, as it wouldhave done if we had discussed it a few hours before.  I thereforeobserved I was not quite sure of that.  But Biddy said she was, andshe said it decisively.  In my heart I believed her to be right; andyet I took it rather ill, too, that she should be so positive onthe point.

When we came near the churchyard, we had to cross an embankment,and get over a stile near a sluice-gate.  There started up, from thegate, or from the rushes, or from the ooze (which was quite in hisstagnant way), Old Orlick.

"Halloa!" he growled, "where are you two going?"

"Where should we be going, but home?"

"Well, then," said he, "I'm jiggered if I don't see you home!"

This penalty of being jiggered was a favorite supposititious caseof his.  He attached no definite meaning to the word that I am awareof, but used it, like his own pretended Christian name, to affrontmankind, and convey an idea of something savagely damaging.  When Iwas younger, I had had a general belief that if he had jiggered mepersonally, he would have done it with a sharp and twisted hook.

Biddy was much against his going with us, and said to me in awhisper, "Don't let him come; I don't like him."  As I did not likehim either, I took the liberty of saying that we thanked him, butwe didn't want seeing home.  He received that piece of informationwith a yell of laughter, and dropped back, but came slouching afterus at a little distance.

Curious to know whether Biddy suspected him of having had a hand inthat murderous attack of which my sister had never been able togive any account, I asked her why she did not like him.

"Oh!" she replied, glancing over her shoulder as he slouched afterus, "because I--I am afraid he likes me."

"Did he ever tell you he liked you?" I asked indignantly.

"No," said Biddy, glancing over her shoulder again, "he never toldme so; but he dances at me, whenever he can catch my eye."

However novel and peculiar this testimony of attachment, I did notdoubt the accuracy of the interpretation.  I was very hot indeedupon Old Orlick's daring to admire her; as hot as if it were anoutrage on myself.

"But it makes no difference to you, you know," said Biddy, calmly.

"No, Biddy, it makes no difference to me; only I don't like it; Idon't approve of it."

"Nor I neither," said Biddy.  "Though that makes no difference toyou."

"Exactly," said I; "but I must tell you I should have no opinion ofyou, Biddy, if he danced at you with your own consent."

I kept an eye on Orlick after that night, and, whenevercircumstances were favorable to his dancing at Biddy, got beforehim to obscure that demonstration.  He had struck root in Joe'sestablishment, by reason of my sister's sudden fancy for him, or Ishould have tried to get him dismissed.  He quite understood andreciprocated my good intentions, as I had reason to knowthereafter.

And now, because my mind was not confused enough before, Icomplicated its confusion fifty thousand-fold, by having states andseasons when I was clear that Biddy was immeasurably better thanEstella, and that the plain honest working life to which I wasborn had nothing in it to be ashamed of, but offered me sufficientmeans of self-respect and happiness.  At those times, I would decideconclusively that my disaffection to dear old Joe and the forgewas gone, and that I was growing up in a fair way to be partnerswith Joe and to keep company with Biddy,--when all in a moment someconfounding remembrance of the Havisham days would fall upon melike a destructive missile, and scatter my wits again.  Scatteredwits take a long time picking up; and often before I had got themwell together, they would be dispersed in all directions by onestray thought, that perhaps after all Miss Havisham was going tomake my fortune when my time was out.

If my time had run out, it would have left me still at the heightof my perplexities, I dare say.  It never did run out, however, butwas brought to a premature end, as I proceed to relate.

Chapter XVIII

It was in the fourth year of my apprenticeship to Joe, and it was aSaturday night.  There was a group assembled round the fire at theThree Jolly Bargemen, attentive to Mr. Wopsle as he read thenewspaper aloud.  Of that group I was one.

A highly popular murder had been committed, and Mr. Wopsle wasimbrued in blood to the eyebrows.  He gloated over every abhorrentadjective in the description, and identified himself with everywitness at the Inquest.  He faintly moaned, "I am done for," as thevictim, and he barbarously bellowed, "I'll serve you out," as themurderer.  He gave the medical testimony, in pointed imitation ofour local practitioner; and he piped and shook, as the agedturnpike-keeper who had heard blows, to an extent so very paralyticas to suggest a doubt regarding the mental competency of thatwitness.  The coroner, in Mr. Wopsle's hands, became Timon of Athens;the beadle, Coriolanus.  He enjoyed himself thoroughly, and we allenjoyed ourselves, and were delightfully comfortable.  In this coseystate of mind we came to the verdict Wilful Murder.

Then, and not sooner, I became aware of a strange gentleman leaningover the back of the settle opposite me, looking on.  There was anexpression of contempt on his face, and he bit the side of a greatforefinger as he watched the group of faces.

"Well!" said the stranger to Mr. Wopsle, when the reading was done,"you have settled it all to your own satisfaction, I have nodoubt?"

Everybody started and looked up, as if it were the murderer.  Helooked at everybody coldly and sarcastically.

"Guilty, of course?" said he.  "Out with it.  Come!"

"Sir," returned Mr. Wopsle, "without having the honor of youracquaintance, I do say Guilty."  Upon this we all took courage tounite in a confirmatory murmur.

"I know you do," said the stranger; "I knew you would.  I told youso.  But now I'll ask you a question.  Do you know, or do you notknow, that the law of England supposes every man to be innocent,until he is proved-proved--to be guilty?"

"Sir," Mr. Wopsle began to reply, "as an Englishman myself, I--"

"Come!" said the stranger, biting his forefinger at him.  "Don'tevade the question.  Either you know it, or you don't know it.  Whichis it to be?"

He stood with his head on one side and himself on one side, in aBullying, interrogative manner, and he threw his forefinger at Mr.Wopsle,--as it were to mark him out--before biting it again.

"Now!" said he.  "Do you know it, or don't you know it?"

"Certainly I know it," replied Mr. Wopsle.

"Certainly you know it.  Then why didn't you say so at first?  Now,I'll ask you another question,"--taking possession of Mr. Wopsle, asif he had a right to him,--"do you know that none of these witnesseshave yet been cross-examined?"

Mr. Wopsle was beginning, "I can only say--" when the strangerstopped him.

"What?  You won't answer the question, yes or no?  Now, I'll try youagain."  Throwing his finger at him again.  "Attend to me.  Are youaware, or are you not aware, that none of these witnesses have yetbeen cross-examined?  Come, I only want one word from you.  Yes, orno?"

Mr. Wopsle hesitated, and we all began to conceive rather a pooropinion of him.

"Come!" said the stranger, "I'll help you.  You don't deserve help,but I'll help you.  Look at that paper you hold in your hand.  Whatis it?"

"What is it?" repeated Mr. Wopsle, eyeing it, much at a loss.

"Is it," pursued the stranger in his most sarcastic and suspiciousmanner, "the printed paper you have just been reading from?"

"Undoubtedly."

"Undoubtedly.  Now, turn to that paper, and tell me whether itdistinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that his legaladvisers instructed him altogether to reserve his defence?"

"I read that just now," Mr. Wopsle pleaded.

"Never mind what you read just now, sir; I don't ask you what youread just now.  You may read the Lord's Prayer backwards, if youlike,--and, perhaps, have done it before to-day.  Turn to the paper.No, no, no my friend; not to the top of the column; you know betterthan that; to the bottom, to the bottom."  (We all began to think Mr.Wopsle full of subterfuge.)  "Well?  Have you found it?"

"Here it is," said Mr. Wopsle.

"Now, follow that passage with your eye, and tell me whether itdistinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that he wasinstructed by his legal advisers wholly to reserve his defence?Come!  Do you make that of it?"

Mr. Wopsle answered, "Those are not the exact words."

"Not the exact words!" repeated the gentleman bitterly.  "Is thatthe exact substance?"

"Yes," said Mr. Wopsle.

"Yes," repeated the stranger, looking round at the rest of thecompany with his right hand extended towards the witness, Wopsle."And now I ask you what you say to the conscience of that man who,with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillowafter having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard?"

We all began to suspect that Mr. Wopsle was not the man we hadthought him, and that he was beginning to be found out.

"And that same man, remember," pursued the gentleman, throwing hisfinger at Mr. Wopsle heavily,--"that same man might be summoned as ajuryman upon this very trial, and, having thus deeply committedhimself, might return to the bosom of his family and lay his headupon his pillow, after deliberately swearing that he would well andtruly try the issue joined between Our Sovereign Lord the King andthe prisoner at the bar, and would a true verdict give according tothe evidence, so help him God!"

We were all deeply persuaded that the unfortunate Wopsle had gonetoo far, and had better stop in his reckless career while there wasyet time.

The strange gentleman, with an air of authority not to be disputed,and with a manner expressive of knowing something secret aboutevery one of us that would effectually do for each individual if hechose to disclose it, left the back of the settle, and came intothe space between the two settles, in front of the fire, where heremained standing, his left hand in his pocket, and he biting theforefinger of his right.

"From information I have received," said he, looking round at us aswe all quailed before him, "I have reason to believe there is ablacksmith among you, by name Joseph--or Joe--Gargery.  Which isthe man?"

"Here is the man," said Joe.

The strange gentleman beckoned him out of his place, and Joe went.

"You have an apprentice," pursued the stranger, "commonly known asPip?  Is he here?"

"I am here!" I cried.

The stranger did not recognize me, but I recognized him as thegentleman I had met on the stairs, on the occasion of my secondvisit to Miss Havisham.  I had known him the moment I saw himlooking over the settle, and now that I stood confronting him withhis hand upon my shoulder, I checked off again in detail his largehead, his dark complexion, his deep-set eyes, his bushy blackeyebrows, his large watch-chain, his strong black dots of beard andwhisker, and even the smell of scented soap on his great hand.

"I wish to have a private conference with you two," said he, whenhe had surveyed me at his leisure.  "It will take a little time.Perhaps we had better go to your place of residence.  I prefer notto anticipate my communication here; you will impart as much or aslittle of it as you please to your friends afterwards; I havenothing to do with that."

Amidst a wondering silence, we three walked out of the JollyBargemen, and in a wondering silence walked home.  While goingalong, the strange gentleman occasionally looked at me, andoccasionally bit the side of his finger.  As we neared home, Joevaguely acknowledging the occasion as an impressive and ceremoniousone, went on ahead to open the front door.  Our conference was heldin the state parlor, which was feebly lighted by one candle.

It began with the strange gentleman's sitting down at the table,drawing the candle to him, and looking over some entries in hispocket-book.  He then put up the pocket-book and set the candle alittle aside, after peering round it into the darkness at Joe andme, to ascertain which was which.

"My name," he said, "is Jaggers, and I am a lawyer in London.  I ampretty well known.  I have unusual business to transact with you,and I commence by explaining that it is not of my originating.  Ifmy advice had been asked, I should not have been here.  It was notasked, and you see me here.  What I have to do as the confidentialagent of another, I do.  No less, no more."

Finding that he could not see us very well from where he sat, hegot up, and threw one leg over the back of a chair and leaned uponit; thus having one foot on the seat of the chair, and one foot onthe ground.

"Now, Joseph Gargery, I am the bearer of an offer to relieve you ofthis young fellow your apprentice.  You would not object to cancelhis indentures at his request and for his good?  You would wantnothing for so doing?"

"Lord forbid that I should want anything for not standing in Pip'sway," said Joe, staring.

"Lord forbidding is pious, but not to the purpose," returned Mr.Jaggers.  "The question is, Would you want anything?  Do you wantanything?"

"The answer is," returned Joe, sternly, "No."

I thought Mr. Jaggers glanced at Joe, as if he considered him a foolfor his disinterestedness.  But I was too much bewildered betweenbreathless curiosity and surprise, to be sure of it.

"Very well," said Mr. Jaggers.  "Recollect the admission you havemade, and don't try to go from it presently."

"Who's a going to try?" retorted Joe.

"I don't say anybody is.  Do you keep a dog?"

"Yes, I do keep a dog."

"Bear in mind then, that Brag is a good dog, but Holdfast is abetter.  Bear that in mind, will you?" repeated Mr. Jaggers, shuttinghis eyes and nodding his head at Joe, as if he were forgiving himsomething.  "Now, I return to this young fellow.  And thecommunication I have got to make is, that he has GreatExpectations."

Joe and I gasped, and looked at one another.

"I am instructed to communicate to him," said Mr. Jaggers, throwinghis finger at me sideways, "that he will come into a handsomeproperty.  Further, that it is the desire of the present possessorof that property, that he be immediately removed from his presentsphere of life and from this place, and be brought up as agentleman,--in a word, as a young fellow of great expectations."

My dream was out; my wild fancy was surpassed by sober reality;Miss Havisham was going to make my fortune on a grand scale.

"Now, Mr. Pip," pursued the lawyer, "I address the rest of what Ihave to say, to you.  You are to understand, first, that it is therequest of the person from whom I take my instructions that youalways bear the name of Pip.  You will have no objection, I daresay, to your great expectations being encumbered with that easycondition.  But if you have any objection, this is the time tomention it."

My heart was beating so fast, and there was such a singing in myears, that I could scarcely stammer I had no objection.

"I should think not!  Now you are to understand, secondly, Mr. Pip,that the name of the person who is your liberal benefactor remainsa profound secret, until the person chooses to reveal it.  I amempowered to mention that it is the intention of the person toreveal it at first hand by word of mouth to yourself.  When or wherethat intention may be carried out, I cannot say; no one can say.  Itmay be years hence.  Now, you are distinctly to understand that youare most positively prohibited from making any inquiry on thishead, or any allusion or reference, however distant, to anyindividual whomsoever as the individual, in all the communicationsyou may have with me.  If you have a suspicion in your own breast,keep that suspicion in your own breast.  It is not the least to thepurpose what the reasons of this prohibition are; they may be thestrongest and gravest reasons, or they may be mere whim.  This isnot for you to inquire into.  The condition is laid down.  Youracceptance of it, and your observance of it as binding, is the onlyremaining condition that I am charged with, by the person from whomI take my instructions, and for whom I am not otherwiseresponsible.  That person is the person from whom you derive yourexpectations, and the secret is solely held by that person and byme.  Again, not a very difficult condition with which to encumbersuch a rise in fortune; but if you have any objection to it, thisis the time to mention it.  Speak out."

Once more, I stammered with difficulty that I had no objection.

"I should think not!  Now, Mr. Pip, I have done with stipulations."Though he called me Mr. Pip, and began rather to make up to me, hestill could not get rid of a certain air of bullying suspicion; andeven now he occasionally shut his eyes and threw his finger at mewhile he spoke, as much as to express that he knew all kinds ofthings to my disparagement, if he only chose to mention them.  "Wecome next, to mere details of arrangement.  You must know that,although I have used the term "expectations" more than once, youare not endowed with expectations only.  There is already lodged inmy hands a sum of money amply sufficient for your suitableeducation and maintenance.  You will please consider me yourguardian.  Oh!" for I was going to thank him, "I tell you at once, Iam paid for my services, or I shouldn't render them.  It isconsidered that you must be better educated, in accordance withyour altered position, and that you will be alive to the importanceand necessity of at once entering on that advantage."

I said I had always longed for it.

"Never mind what you have always longed for, Mr. Pip," he retorted;"keep to the record.  If you long for it now, that's enough.  Am Ianswered that you are ready to be placed at once under some propertutor?  Is that it?"

I stammered yes, that was it.

"Good.  Now, your inclinations are to be consulted.  I don't thinkthat wise, mind, but it's my trust.  Have you ever heard of anytutor whom you would prefer to another?"

I had never heard of any tutor but Biddy and Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt;so, I replied in the negative.

"There is a certain tutor, of whom I have some knowledge, who Ithink might suit the purpose," said Mr. Jaggers.  "I don't recommendhim, observe; because I never recommend anybody.  The gentleman Ispeak of is one Mr. Matthew Pocket."

Ah!  I caught at the name directly.  Miss Havisham's relation.  TheMatthew whom Mr. and Mrs. Camilla had spoken of.  The Matthew whoseplace was to be at Miss Havisham's head, when she lay dead, in herbride's dress on the bride's table.

"You know the name?" said Mr. Jaggers, looking shrewdly at me, andthen shutting up his eyes while he waited for my answer.

My answer was, that I had heard of the name.

"Oh!" said he.  "You have heard of the name.  But the question is,what do you say of it?"

I said, or tried to say, that I was much obliged to him for hisrecommendation--

"No, my young friend!" he interrupted, shaking his great head veryslowly.  "Recollect yourself!"

Not recollecting myself, I began again that I was much obliged tohim for his recommendation--

"No, my young friend," he interrupted, shaking his head andfrowning and smiling both at once,--"no, no, no; it's very welldone, but it won't do; you are too young to fix me with it.Recommendation is not the word, Mr. Pip.  Try another."

Correcting myself, I said that I was much obliged to him for hismention of Mr. Matthew Pocket--

"That's more like it!" cried Mr. Jaggers.

--And (I added), I would gladly try that gentleman.

"Good.  You had better try him in his own house.  The way shall beprepared for you, and you can see his son first, who is in London.When will you come to London?"

I said (glancing at Joe, who stood looking on, motionless), that Isupposed I could come directly.

"First," said Mr. Jaggers, "you should have some new clothes to comein, and they should not be working-clothes.  Say this day week.You'll want some money.  Shall I leave you twenty guineas?"

He produced a long purse, with the greatest coolness, and countedthem out on the table and pushed them over to me.  This was thefirst time he had taken his leg from the chair.  He sat astride ofthe chair when he had pushed the money over, and sat swinging hispurse and eyeing Joe.

"Well, Joseph Gargery?  You look dumbfoundered?"

"I am!" said Joe, in a very decided manner.

"It was understood that you wanted nothing for yourself, remember?"

"It were understood," said Joe.  "And it are understood.  And it everwill be similar according."

"But what," said Mr. Jaggers, swinging his purse,--"what if it was inmy instructions to make you a present, as compensation?"

"As compensation what for?" Joe demanded.

"For the loss of his services."

Joe laid his hand upon my shoulder with the touch of a woman.  Ihave often thought him since, like the steam-hammer that can crusha man or pat an egg-shell, in his combination of strength withgentleness.  "Pip is that hearty welcome," said Joe, "to go freewith his services, to honor and fortun', as no words can tell him.But if you think as Money can make compensation to me for the lossof the little child--what come to the forge--and ever the best offriends!--"

O dear good Joe, whom I was so ready to leave and so unthankful to,I see you again, with your muscular blacksmith's arm before youreyes, and your broad chest heaving, and your voice dying away.  Odear good faithful tender Joe, I feel the loving tremble of yourhand upon my arm, as solemnly this day as if it had been the rustleof an angel's wing!

But I encouraged Joe at the time.  I was lost in the mazes of myfuture fortunes, and could not retrace the by-paths we had troddentogether.  I begged Joe to be comforted, for (as he said) we hadever been the best of friends, and (as I said) we ever would be so.Joe scooped his eyes with his disengaged wrist, as if he were benton gouging himself, but said not another word.

Mr. Jaggers had looked on at this, as one who recognized in Joe thevillage idiot, and in me his keeper.  When it was over, he said,weighing in his hand the purse he had ceased to swing:--

"Now, Joseph Gargery, I warn you this is your last chance.  No halfmeasures with me.  If you mean to take a present that I have it incharge to make you, speak out, and you shall have it.  If on thecontrary you mean to say--" Here, to his great amazement, he wasstopped by Joe's suddenly working round him with everydemonstration of a fell pugilistic purpose.

"Which I meantersay," cried Joe, "that if you come into my placebull-baiting and badgering me, come out!  Which I meantersay as sechif you're a man, come on!  Which I meantersay that what I say, Imeantersay and stand or fall by!"

I drew Joe away, and he immediately became placable; merely statingto me, in an obliging manner and as a polite expostulatory noticeto any one whom it might happen to concern, that he were not agoing to be bull-baited and badgered in his own place.  Mr. Jaggershad risen when Joe demonstrated, and had backed near the door.Without evincing any inclination to come in again, he theredelivered his valedictory remarks.  They were these.

"Well, Mr. Pip, I think the sooner you leave here--as you are to bea gentleman--the better.  Let it stand for this day week, and youshall receive my printed address in the meantime.  You can take ahackney-coach at the stage-coach office in London, and comestraight to me.  Understand, that I express no opinion, one way orother, on the trust I undertake.  I am paid for undertaking it, andI do so.  Now, understand that, finally.  Understand that!"

He was throwing his finger at both of us, and I think would havegone on, but for his seeming to think Joe dangerous, and going off.

Something came into my head which induced me to run after him, ashe was going down to the Jolly Bargemen, where he had left a hiredcarriage.

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Jaggers."

"Halloa!" said he, facing round, "what's the matter?"

"I wish to be quite right, Mr. Jaggers, and to keep to yourdirections; so I thought I had better ask.  Would there be anyobjection to my taking leave of any one I know, about here, beforeI go away?"

"No," said he, looking as if he hardly understood me.

"I don't mean in the village only, but up town?"

"No," said he.  "No objection."

I thanked him and ran home again, and there I found that Joe hadalready locked the front door and vacated the state parlor, andwas seated by the kitchen fire with a hand on each knee, gazingintently at the burning coals.  I too sat down before the fire andgazed at the coals, and nothing was said for a long time.

My sister was in her cushioned chair in her corner, and Biddy satat her needle-work before the fire, and Joe sat next Biddy, and Isat next Joe in the corner opposite my sister.  The more I lookedinto the glowing coals, the more incapable I became of looking atJoe; the longer the silence lasted, the more unable I felt tospeak.

At length I got out, "Joe, have you told Biddy?"

"No, Pip," returned Joe, still looking at the fire, and holding hisknees tight, as if he had private information that they intended tomake off somewhere, "which I left it to yourself, Pip."

"I would rather you told, Joe."

"Pip's a gentleman of fortun' then," said Joe, "and God bless himin it!"

Biddy dropped her work, and looked at me.  Joe held his knees andlooked at me.  I looked at both of them.  After a pause, they bothheartily congratulated me; but there was a certain touch of sadnessin their congratulations that I rather resented.

I took it upon myself to impress Biddy (and through Biddy, Joe)with the grave obligation I considered my friends under, to knownothing and say nothing about the maker of my fortune.  It would allcome out in good time, I observed, and in the meanwhile nothing wasto be said, save that I had come into great expectations from amysterious patron.  Biddy nodded her head thoughtfully at the fireas she took up her work again, and said she would be veryparticular; and Joe, still detaining his knees, said, "Ay, ay, I'llbe ekervally partickler, Pip;" and then they congratulated meagain, and went on to express so much wonder at the notion of mybeing a gentleman that I didn't half like it.

Infinite pains were then taken by Biddy to convey to my sister someidea of what had happened.  To the best of my belief, those effortsentirely failed.  She laughed and nodded her head a great manytimes, and even repeated after Biddy, the words "Pip" and"Property."  But I doubt if they had more meaning in them than anelection cry, and I cannot suggest a darker picture of her state ofmind.

I never could have believed it without experience, but as Joe andBiddy became more at their cheerful ease again, I became quitegloomy.  Dissatisfied with my fortune, of course I could not be; butit is possible that I may have been, without quite knowing it,dissatisfied with myself.

Any how, I sat with my elbow on my knee and my face upon my hand,looking into the fire, as those two talked about my going away, andabout what they should do without me, and all that.  And whenever Icaught one of them looking at me, though never so pleasantly (andthey often looked at me,--particularly Biddy), I felt offended:  asif they were expressing some mistrust of me.  Though Heaven knowsthey never did by word or sign.

At those times I would get up and look out at the door; for ourkitchen door opened at once upon the night, and stood open onsummer evenings to air the room.  The very stars to which I thenraised my eyes, I am afraid I took to be but poor and humble starsfor glittering on the rustic objects among which I had passed mylife.

"Saturday night," said I, when we sat at our supper ofbread and cheese and beer.  "Five more days, and then the day beforethe day!  They'll soon go."

"Yes, Pip," observed Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug.  "They'll soon go."

"Soon, soon go," said Biddy.

"I have been thinking, Joe, that when I go down town on Monday, andorder my new clothes, I shall tell the tailor that I'll come andput them on there, or that I'll have them sent to Mr. Pumblechook's.It would be very disagreeable to be stared at by all the peoplehere."

"Mr. and Mrs. Hubble might like to see you in your new gen-teel figuretoo, Pip," said Joe, industriously cutting his bread, with hischeese on it, in the palm of his left hand, and glancing at myuntasted supper as if he thought of the time when we used tocompare slices.  "So might Wopsle.  And the Jolly Bargemen might takeit as a compliment."

"That's just what I don't want, Joe.  They would make such abusiness of it,--such a coarse and common business,--that Icouldn't bear myself."

"Ah, that indeed, Pip!" said Joe.  "If you couldn't abearyourself--"

Biddy asked me here, as she sat holding my sister's plate, "Haveyou thought about when you'll show yourself to Mr. Gargery, and yoursister and me?  You will show yourself to us; won't you?"

"Biddy," I returned with some resentment, "you are so exceedinglyquick that it's difficult to keep up with you."

("She always were quick," observed Joe.)

"If you had waited another moment, Biddy, you would have heard mesay that I shall bring my clothes here in a bundle one evening,--most likely on the evening before I go away."

Biddy said no more.  Handsomely forgiving her, I soon exchanged anaffectionate good night with her and Joe, and went up to bed.  WhenI got into my little room, I sat down and took a long look at it,as a mean little room that I should soon be parted from and raisedabove, for ever. It was furnished with fresh young remembrancestoo, and even at the same moment I fell into much the same confuseddivision of mind between it and the better rooms to which I wasgoing, as I had been in so often between the forge and MissHavisham's, and Biddy and Estella.

The sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of my attic,and the room was warm.  As I put the window open and stood lookingout, I saw Joe come slowly forth at the dark door, below, and take aturn or two in the air; and then I saw Biddy come, and bring him apipe and light it for him.  He never smoked so late, and it seemedto hint to me that he wanted comforting, for some reason or other.

He presently stood at the door immediately beneath me, smoking hispipe, and Biddy stood there too, quietly talking to him, and I knewthat they talked of me, for I heard my name mentioned in anendearing tone by both of them more than once.  I would not havelistened for more, if I could have heard more; so I drew away fromthe window, and sat down in my one chair by the bedside, feeling itvery sorrowful and strange that this first night of my brightfortunes should be the loneliest I had ever known.

Looking towards the open window, I saw light wreaths from Joe'spipe floating there, and I fancied it was like a blessing from Joe,--not obtruded on me or paraded before me, but pervading the air weshared together.  I put my light out, and crept into bed; and it wasan uneasy bed now, and I never slept the old sound sleep in it anymore.

Chapter XIX

Morning made a considerable difference in my general prospect ofLife, and brightened it so much that it scarcely seemed the same.What lay heaviest on my mind was, the consideration that six daysintervened between me and the day of departure; for I could notdivest myself of a misgiving that something might happen to Londonin the meanwhile, and that, when I got there, it would be eithergreatly deteriorated or clean gone.

Joe and Biddy were very sympathetic and pleasant when I spoke ofour approaching separation; but they only referred to it when Idid.  After breakfast, Joe brought out my indentures from the pressin the best parlor, and we put them in the fire, and I felt that Iwas free.  With all the novelty of my emancipation on me, I went tochurch with Joe, and thought perhaps the clergyman wouldn't haveread that about the rich man and the kingdom of Heaven, if he hadknown all.

After our early dinner, I strolled out alone, purposing to finishoff the marshes at once, and get them done with.  As I passed thechurch, I felt (as I had felt during service in the morning) asublime compassion for the poor creatures who were destined to gothere, Sunday after Sunday, all their lives through, and to lieobscurely at last among the low green mounds.  I promised myselfthat I would do something for them one of these days, and formed aplan in outline for bestowing a dinner of roast-beef andplum-pudding, a pint of ale, and a gallon of condescension, uponeverybody in the village.

If I had often thought before, with something allied to shame, ofmy companionship with the fugitive whom I had once seen limpingamong those graves, what were my thoughts on this Sunday, when theplace recalled the wretch, ragged and shivering, with his feloniron and badge!  My comfort was, that it happened a long time ago,and that he had doubtless been transported a long way off, and thathe was dead to me, and might be veritably dead into the bargain.

No more low, wet grounds, no more dikes and sluices, no more ofthese grazing cattle,--though they seemed, in their dull manner, towear a more respectful air now, and to face round, in order thatthey might stare as long as possible at the possessor of such greatexpectations,--farewell, monotonous acquaintances of my childhood,henceforth I was for London and greatness; not for smith's work ingeneral, and for you!  I made my exultant way to the old Battery,and, lying down there to consider the question whether MissHavisham intended me for Estella, fell asleep.

When I awoke, I was much surprised to find Joe sitting beside me,smoking his pipe.  He greeted me with a cheerful smile on my openingmy eyes, and said,--

"As being the last time, Pip, I thought I'd foller."

"And Joe, I am very glad you did so."

"Thankee, Pip."

"You may be sure, dear Joe," I went on, after we had shaken hands,"that I shall never forget you."

"No, no, Pip!" said Joe, in a comfortable tone, "I'm sure of that.Ay, ay, old chap!  Bless you, it were only necessary to get it wellround in a man's mind, to be certain on it.  But it took a bit oftime to get it well round, the change come so oncommon plump;didn't it?"

Somehow, I was not best pleased with Joe's being so mightily secureof me.  I should have liked him to have betrayed emotion, or to havesaid, "It does you credit, Pip," or something of that sort.Therefore, I made no remark on Joe's first head; merely saying asto his second, that the tidings had indeed come suddenly, but thatI had always wanted to be a gentleman, and had often and oftenspeculated on what I would do, if I were one.

"Have you though?" said Joe.  "Astonishing!"

"It's a pity now, Joe," said I, "that you did not get on a littlemore, when we had our lessons here; isn't it?"

"Well, I don't know," returned Joe.  "I'm so awful dull.  I'm onlymaster of my own trade.  It were always a pity as I was so awfuldull; but it's no more of a pity now, than it was--this daytwelvemonth--don't you see?"

What I had meant was, that when I came into my property and wasable to do something for Joe, it would have been much moreagreeable if he had been better qualified for a rise in station.  Hewas so perfectly innocent of my meaning, however, that I thought Iwould mention it to Biddy in preference.

So, when we had walked home and had had tea, I took Biddy into ourlittle garden by the side of the lane, and, after throwing out in ageneral way for the elevation of her spirits, that I should neverforget her, said I had a favor to ask of her.

"And it is, Biddy," said I, "that you will not omit any opportunityof helping Joe on, a little."

"How helping him on?" asked Biddy, with a steady sort of glance.

"Well!  Joe is a dear good fellow,--in fact, I think he is thedearest fellow that ever lived,--but he is rather backward in somethings.  For instance, Biddy, in his learning and his manners."

Although I was looking at Biddy as I spoke, and although she openedher eyes very wide when I had spoken, she did not look at me.

"O, his manners! won't his manners do then?" asked Biddy,plucking a black-currant leaf.

"My dear Biddy, they do very well here--"

"O! they do very well here?" interrupted Biddy, looking closely atthe leaf in her hand.

"Hear me out,--but if I were to remove Joe into a higher sphere, asI shall hope to remove him when I fully come into my property, theywould hardly do him justice."

"And don't you think he knows that?" asked Biddy.

It was such a very provoking question (for it had never in the mostdistant manner occurred to me), that I said, snappishly,--

"Biddy, what do you mean?"

Biddy, having rubbed the leaf to pieces between her hands,--and thesmell of a black-currant bush has ever since recalled to me thatevening in the little garden by the side of the lane,--said, "Haveyou never considered that he may be proud?"

"Proud?" I repeated, with disdainful emphasis.

"O! there are many kinds of pride," said Biddy, looking full at meand shaking her head; "pride is not all of one kind--"

"Well?  What are you stopping for?" said I.

"Not all of one kind," resumed Biddy.  "He may be too proud to letany one take him out of a place that he is competent to fill, andfills well and with respect.  To tell you the truth, I think he is;though it sounds bold in me to say so, for you must know him farbetter than I do."

"Now, Biddy," said I, "I am very sorry to see this in you.  I didnot expect to see this in you.  You are envious, Biddy, andgrudging.  You are dissatisfied on account of my rise in fortune,and you can't help showing it."

"If you have the heart to think so," returned Biddy, "say so.  Sayso over and over again, if you have the heart to think so."

"If you have the heart to be so, you mean, Biddy," said I, in avirtuous and superior tone; "don't put it off upon me.  I am verysorry to see it, and it's a--it's a bad side of human nature.  Idid intend to ask you to use any little opportunities you mighthave after I was gone, of improving dear Joe.  But after this I askyou nothing.  I am extremely sorry to see this in you, Biddy," Irepeated.  "It's a--it's a bad side of human nature."

"Whether you scold me or approve of me," returned poor Biddy, "youmay equally depend upon my trying to do all that lies in my power,here, at all times.  And whatever opinion you take away of me, shallmake no difference in my remembrance of you.  Yet a gentleman shouldnot be unjust neither," said Biddy, turning away her head.

I again warmly repeated that it was a bad side of human nature (inwhich sentiment, waiving its application, I have since seen reasonto think I was right), and I walked down the little path away fromBiddy, and Biddy went into the house, and I went out at the gardengate and took a dejected stroll until supper-time; again feeling itvery sorrowful and strange that this, the second night of my brightfortunes, should be as lonely and unsatisfactory as the first.

But, morning once more brightened my view, and I extended myclemency to Biddy, and we dropped the subject.  Putting on the bestclothes I had, I went into town as early as I could hope to findthe shops open, and presented myself before Mr. Trabb, the tailor,who was having his breakfast in the parlor behind his shop, andwho did not think it worth his while to come out to me, but calledme in to him.

"Well!" said Mr. Trabb, in a hail-fellow-well-met kind of way.  "Howare you, and what can I do for you?"

Mr. Trabb had sliced his hot roll into three feather-beds, and wasslipping butter in between the blankets, and covering it up.  He wasa prosperous old bachelor, and his open window looked into aprosperous little garden and orchard, and there was a prosperousiron safe let into the wall at the side of his fireplace, and I didnot doubt that heaps of his prosperity were put away in it in bags.

"Mr. Trabb," said I, "it's an unpleasant thing to have to mention,because it looks like boasting; but I have come into a handsomeproperty."

A change passed over Mr. Trabb.  He forgot the butter in bed, got upfrom the bedside, and wiped his fingers on the tablecloth,exclaiming, "Lord bless my soul!"

"I am going up to my guardian in London," said I, casually drawingsome guineas out of my pocket and looking at them; "and I want afashionable suit of clothes to go in.  I wish to pay for them," Iadded--otherwise I thought he might only pretend to make them,"with ready money."

"My dear sir," said Mr. Trabb, as he respectfully bent his body,opened his arms, and took the liberty of touching me on the outsideof each elbow, "don't hurt me by mentioning that.  May I venture tocongratulate you?  Would you do me the favor of stepping into theshop?"

Mr. Trabb's boy was the most audacious boy in all that country-side.When I had entered he was sweeping the shop, and he had sweetenedhis labors by sweeping over me.  He was still sweeping when I cameout into the shop with Mr. Trabb, and he knocked the broom againstall possible corners and obstacles, to express (as I understood it)equality with any blacksmith, alive or dead.

"Hold that noise," said Mr. Trabb, with the greatest sternness, "orI'll knock your head off!--Do me the favor to be seated, sir.  Now,this," said Mr. Trabb, taking down a roll of cloth, and tiding itout in a flowing manner over the counter, preparatory to gettinghis hand under it to show the gloss, "is a very sweet article.  Ican recommend it for your purpose, sir, because it really is extrasuper.  But you shall see some others.  Give me Number Four, you!"(To the boy, and with a dreadfully severe stare; foreseeing thedanger of that miscreant's brushing me with it, or making someother sign of familiarity.)

Mr. Trabb never removed his stern eye from the boy until he haddeposited number four on the counter and was at a safe distanceagain.  Then he commanded him to bring number five, and numbereight.  "And let me have none of your tricks here," said Mr. Trabb,"or you shall repent it, you young scoundrel, the longest day youhave to live."

Mr. Trabb then bent over number four, and in a sort of deferentialconfidence recommended it to me as a light article for summer wear,an article much in vogue among the nobility and gentry, an articlethat it would ever be an honor to him to reflect upon adistinguished fellow-townsman's (if he might claim me for afellow-townsman) having worn.  "Are you bringing numbers five andeight, you vagabond," said Mr. Trabb to the boy after that, "orshall I kick you out of the shop and bring them myself?"

I selected the materials for a suit, with the assistance of Mr.Trabb's judgment, and re-entered the parlor to be measured.  Foralthough Mr. Trabb had my measure already, and had previously beenquite contented with it, he said apologetically that it "wouldn'tdo under existing circumstances, sir,--wouldn't do at all."  So, Mr.Trabb measured and calculated me in the parlor, as if I were anestate and he the finest species of surveyor, and gave himself sucha world of trouble that I felt that no suit of clothes couldpossibly remunerate him for his pains.  When he had at last done andhad appointed to send the articles to Mr. Pumblechook's on theThursday evening, he said, with his hand upon the parlor lock, "Iknow, sir, that London gentlemen cannot be expected to patronizelocal work, as a rule; but if you would give me a turn now and thenin the quality of a townsman, I should greatly esteem it.  Goodmorning, sir, much obliged.--Door!"

The last word was flung at the boy, who had not the least notionwhat it meant.  But I saw him collapse as his master rubbed me outwith his hands, and my first decided experience of the stupendouspower of money was, that it had morally laid upon his backTrabb's boy.

After this memorable event, I went to the hatter's, and thebootmaker's, and the hosier's, and felt rather like MotherHubbard's dog whose outfit required the services of so many trades.I also went to the coach-office and took my place for seven o'clockon Saturday morning.  It was not necessary to explain everywherethat I had come into a handsome property; but whenever I saidanything to that effect, it followed that the officiating tradesmanceased to have his attention diverted through the window by theHigh Street, and concentrated his mind upon me.  When I had orderedeverything I wanted, I directed my steps towards Pumblechook's,and, as I approached that gentleman's place of business, I saw himstanding at his door.

He was waiting for me with great impatience.  He had been out earlywith the chaise-cart, and had called at the forge and heard thenews.  He had prepared a collation for me in the Barnwell parlor,and he too ordered his shopman to "come out of the gangway" as mysacred person passed.

"My dear friend," said Mr. Pumblechook, taking me by both hands,when he and I and the collation were alone, "I give you joy of yourgood fortune.  Well deserved, well deserved!"

This was coming to the point, and I thought it a sensible way ofexpressing himself.

"To think," said Mr. Pumblechook, after snorting admiration at mefor some moments, "that I should have been the humble instrument ofleading up to this, is a proud reward."

I begged Mr. Pumblechook to remember that nothing was to be eversaid or hinted, on that point.

"My dear young friend," said Mr. Pumblechook; "if you will allow meto call you so--"

I murmured "Certainly," and Mr. Pumblechook took me by both handsagain, and communicated a movement to his waistcoat, which had anemotional appearance, though it was rather low down, "My dear youngfriend, rely upon my doing my little all in your absence, bykeeping the fact before the mind of Joseph.--Joseph!" said Mr.Pumblechook, in the way of a compassionate adjuration.  "Joseph!!Joseph!!!"  Thereupon he shook his head and tapped it, expressinghis sense of deficiency in Joseph.

"But my dear young friend," said Mr. Pumblechook, "you must behungry, you must be exhausted.  Be seated.  Here is a chicken hadround from the Boar, here is a tongue had round from the Boar,here's one or two little things had round from the Boar, that Ihope you may not despise.  But do I," said Mr. Pumblechook, gettingup again the moment after he had sat down, "see afore me, him as Iever sported with in his times of happy infancy?  And may I--mayI--?"

This May I, meant might he shake hands?  I consented, and he wasfervent, and then sat down again.

"Here is wine," said Mr. Pumblechook.  "Let us drink, Thanks toFortune, and may she ever pick out her favorites with equaljudgment!  And yet I cannot," said Mr. Pumblechook, getting up again,"see afore me One--and likewise drink to One--without againexpressing--May I--may I--?"

I said he might, and he shook hands with me again, and emptied hisglass and turned it upside down.  I did the same; and if I hadturned myself upside down before drinking, the wine could not havegone more direct to my head.

Mr. Pumblechook helped me to the liver wing, and to the best sliceof tongue (none of those out-of-the-way No Thoroughfares of Porknow), and took, comparatively speaking, no care of himself at all."Ah! poultry, poultry!  You little thought," said Mr. Pumblechook,apostrophizing the fowl in the dish, "when you was a youngfledgling, what was in store for you.  You little thought you was tobe refreshment beneath this humble roof for one as--Call it aweakness, if you will," said Mr. Pumblechook, getting up again, "butmay I?  may I--?"

It began to be unnecessary to repeat the form of saying he might,so he did it at once.  How he ever did it so often without woundinghimself with my knife, I don't know.

"And your sister," he resumed, after a little steady eating, "whichhad the honor of bringing you up by hand!  It's a sad picter, toreflect that she's no longer equal to fully understanding thehonor.  May--"

I saw he was about to come at me again, and I stopped him.

"We'll drink her health," said I.

"Ah!" cried Mr. Pumblechook, leaning back in his chair, quiteflaccid with admiration, "that's the way you know 'em, sir!"  (Idon't know who Sir was, but he certainly was not I, and there wasno third person present); "that's the way you know the noble-minded,sir!  Ever forgiving and ever affable.  It might," said the servilePumblechook, putting down his untasted glass in a hurry and gettingup again, "to a common person, have the appearance of repeating--but may I--?"

When he had done it, he resumed his seat and drank to my sister."Let us never be blind," said Mr. Pumblechook, "to her faults oftemper, but it is to be hoped she meant well."

At about this time, I began to observe that he was getting flushedin the face; as to myself, I felt all face, steeped in wine andsmarting.

I mentioned to Mr. Pumblechook that I wished to have my new clothessent to his house, and he was ecstatic on my so distinguishing him.I mentioned my reason for desiring to avoid observation in thevillage, and he lauded it to the skies.  There was nobody buthimself, he intimated, worthy of my confidence, and--in short,might he?  Then he asked me tenderly if I remembered our boyishgames at sums, and how we had gone together to have me boundapprentice, and, in effect, how he had ever been my favorite fancyand my chosen friend?  If I had taken ten times as many glasses ofwine as I had, I should have known that he never had stood in thatrelation towards me, and should in my heart of hearts haverepudiated the idea.  Yet for all that, I remember feeling convincedthat I had been much mistaken in him, and that he was a sensible,practical, good-hearted prime fellow.

By degrees he fell to reposing such great confidence in me, as toask my advice in reference to his own affairs.  He mentioned thatthere was an opportunity for a great amalgamation and monopoly ofthe corn and seed trade on those premises, if enlarged, such as hadnever occurred before in that or any other neighborhood.  Whatalone was wanting to the realization of a vast fortune, heconsidered to be More Capital.  Those were the two little words,more capital.  Now it appeared to him (Pumblechook) that if thatcapital were got into the business, through a sleeping partner, sir,--which sleeping partner would have nothing to do but walk in, byself or deputy, whenever he pleased, and examine the books,--andwalk in twice a year and take his profits away in his pocket, tothe tune of fifty per cent,--it appeared to him that that might bean opening for a young gentleman of spirit combined with property,which would be worthy of his attention.  But what did I think?  Hehad great confidence in my opinion, and what did I think?  I gave itas my opinion.  "Wait a bit!"  The united vastness and distinctnessof this view so struck him, that he no longer asked if he mightshake hands with me, but said he really must,--and did.

We drank all the wine, and Mr. Pumblechook pledged himself over andover again to keep Joseph up to the mark (I don't know what mark),and to render me efficient and constant service (I don't know whatservice).  He also made known to me for the first time in my life,and certainly after having kept his secret wonderfully well, thathe had always said of me, "That boy is no common boy, and mark me,his fortun' will be no common fortun'."  He said with a tearfulsmile that it was a singular thing to think of now, and I said sotoo.  Finally, I went out into the air, with a dim perception thatthere was something unwonted in the conduct of the sunshine, andfound that I had slumberously got to the turnpike without havingtaken any account of the road.

There, I was roused by Mr. Pumblechook's hailing me.  He was a longway down the sunny street, and was making expressive gestures forme to stop.  I stopped, and he came up breathless.

"No, my dear friend," said he, when he had recovered wind forspeech.  "Not if I can help it.  This occasion shall not entirelypass without that affability on your part.--May I, as an oldfriend and well-wisher?  May I?"

We shook hands for the hundredth time at least, and he ordered ayoung carter out of my way with the greatest indignation.  Then, heblessed me and stood waving his hand to me until I had passed thecrook in the road; and then I turned into a field and had a longnap under a hedge before I pursued my way home.

I had scant luggage to take with me to London, for little of thelittle I possessed was adapted to my new station.  But I beganpacking that same afternoon, and wildly packed up things that Iknew I should want next morning, in a fiction that there was not amoment to be lost.

So, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, passed; and on Friday morningI went to Mr. Pumblechook's, to put on my new clothes and pay myvisit to Miss Havisham.  Mr. Pumblechook's own room was given up tome to dress in, and was decorated with clean towels expressly forthe event.  My clothes were rather a disappointment, of course.Probably every new and eagerly expected garment ever put on sinceclothes came in, fell a trifle short of the wearer's expectation.But after I had had my new suit on some half an hour, and had gonethrough an immensity of posturing with Mr. Pumblechook's verylimited dressing-glass, in the futile endeavor to see my legs, itseemed to fit me better.  It being market morning at a neighboringtown some ten miles off, Mr. Pumblechook was not at home.  I had nottold him exactly when I meant to leave, and was not likely to shakehands with him again before departing.  This was all as it shouldbe, and I went out in my new array, fearfully ashamed of having topass the shopman, and suspicious after all that I was at a personaldisadvantage, something like Joe's in his Sunday suit.

I went circuitously to Miss Havisham's by all the back ways, andrang at the bell constrainedly, on account of the stiff longfingers of my gloves.  Sarah Pocket came to the gate, and positivelyreeled back when she saw me so changed; her walnut-shellcountenance likewise turned from brown to green and yellow.

"You?" said she.  "You? Good gracious!  What do you want?"

"I am going to London, Miss Pocket," said I, "and want to saygood by to Miss Havisham."

I was not expected, for she left me locked in the yard, while shewent to ask if I were to be admitted.  After a very short delay, shereturned and took me up, staring at me all the way.

Miss Havisham was taking exercise in the room with the long spreadtable, leaning on her crutch stick.  The room was lighted as ofyore, and at the sound of our entrance, she stopped and turned.  Shewas then just abreast of the rotted bride-cake.

"Don't go, Sarah," she said.  "Well, Pip?"

"I start for London, Miss Havisham, to-morrow," I was exceedinglycareful what I said, "and I thought you would kindly not mind mytaking leave of you."

"This is a gay figure, Pip," said she, making her crutch stick playround me, as if she, the fairy godmother who had changed me, werebestowing the finishing gift.

"I have come into such good fortune since I saw you last, MissHavisham," I murmured.  "And I am so grateful for it, MissHavisham!"

"Ay, ay!" said she, looking at the discomfited and envious Sarah,with delight.  "I have seen Mr. Jaggers.  I have heard about it, Pip.So you go to-morrow?"

"Yes, Miss Havisham."

"And you are adopted by a rich person?"

"Yes, Miss Havisham."

"Not named?"

"No, Miss Havisham."

"And Mr. Jaggers is made your guardian?"

"Yes, Miss Havisham."

She quite gloated on these questions and answers, so keen was herenjoyment of Sarah Pocket's jealous dismay.  "Well!" she went on;"you have a promising career before you.  Be good--deserve it--andabide by Mr. Jaggers's instructions."  She looked at me, and lookedat Sarah, and Sarah's countenance wrung out of her watchful face acruel smile.  "Good by, Pip!--you will always keep the name ofPip, you know."

"Yes, Miss Havisham."

"Good by, Pip!"

She stretched out her hand, and I went down on my knee and put itto my lips.  I had not considered how I should take leave of her; itcame naturally to me at the moment to do this.  She looked at SarahPocket with triumph in her weird eyes, and so I left my fairygodmother, with both her hands on her crutch stick, standing in themidst of the dimly lighted room beside the rotten bride-cake thatwas hidden in cobwebs.

Sarah Pocket conducted me down, as if I were a ghost who must beseen out.  She could not get over my appearance, and was in the lastdegree confounded.  I said "Good by, Miss Pocket;" but she merelystared, and did not seem collected enough to know that I hadspoken.  Clear of the house, I made the best of my way back toPumblechook's, took off my new clothes, made them into a bundle,and went back home in my older dress, carrying it--to speak thetruth--much more at my ease too, though I had the bundle to carry.

And now, those six days which were to have run out so slowly, hadrun out fast and were gone, and to-morrow looked me in the facemore steadily than I could look at it.  As the six evenings haddwindled away, to five, to four, to three, to two, I had becomemore and more appreciative of the society of Joe and Biddy.  On thislast evening, I dressed my self out in my new clothes for theirdelight, and sat in my splendor until bedtime.  We had a hot supperon the occasion, graced by the inevitable roast fowl, and we hadsome flip to finish with.  We were all very low, and none the higherfor pretending to be in spirits.

I was to leave our village at five in the morning, carrying mylittle hand-portmanteau, and I had told Joe that I wished to walkaway all alone.  I am afraid--sore afraid--that this purposeoriginated in my sense of the contrast there would be between meand Joe, if we went to the coach together.  I had pretended withmyself that there was nothing of this taint in the arrangement; butwhen I went up to my little room on this last night, I feltcompelled to admit that it might be so, and had an impulse upon meto go down again and entreat Joe to walk with me in the morning.  Idid not.

All night there were coaches in my broken sleep, going to wrongplaces instead of to London, and having in the traces, now dogs,now cats, now pigs, now men,--never horses.  Fantastic failures ofjourneys occupied me until the day dawned and the birds weresinging.  Then, I got up and partly dressed, and sat at the windowto take a last look out, and in taking it fell asleep.

Biddy was astir so early to get my breakfast, that, although I didnot sleep at the window an hour, I smelt the smoke of the kitchenfire when I started up with a terrible idea that it must be late inthe afternoon.  But long after that, and long after I had heard theclinking of the teacups and was quite ready, I wanted theresolution to go down stairs.  After all, I remained up there,repeatedly unlocking and unstrapping my small portmanteau andlocking and strapping it up again, until Biddy called to me that Iwas late.

It was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it.  I got up from themeal, saying with a sort of briskness, as if it had only justoccurred to me, "Well!  I suppose I must be off!" and then I kissedmy sister who was laughing and nodding and shaking in her usualchair, and kissed Biddy, and threw my arms around Joe's neck.  ThenI took up my little portmanteau and walked out.  The last I saw ofthem was, when I presently heard a scuffle behind me, and lookingback, saw Joe throwing an old shoe after me and Biddy throwinganother old shoe.  I stopped then, to wave my hat, and dear old Joewaved his strong right arm above his head, crying huskily"Hooroar!" and Biddy put her apron to her face.

I walked away at a good pace, thinking it was easier to go than Ihad supposed it would be, and reflecting that it would never havedone to have had an old shoe thrown after the coach, in sight ofall the High Street.  I whistled and made nothing of going.  But thevillage was very peaceful and quiet, and the light mists weresolemnly rising, as if to show me the world, and I had been soinnocent and little there, and all beyond was so unknown and great,that in a moment with a strong heave and sob I broke into tears.  Itwas by the finger-post at the end of the village, and I laid myhand upon it, and said, "Good by, O my dear, dear friend!"

Heaven knows we need never be ashamed of our tears, for they arerain upon the blinding dust of earth, overlying our hard hearts.  Iwas better after I had cried than before,--more sorry, more awareof my own ingratitude, more gentle.  If I had cried before, I shouldhave had Joe with me then.

So subdued I was by those tears, and by their breaking out again inthe course of the quiet walk, that when I was on the coach, and itwas clear of the town, I deliberated with an aching heart whether Iwould not get down when we changed horses and walk back, and haveanother evening at home, and a better parting.  We changed, and Ihad not made up my mind, and still reflected for my comfort that itwould be quite practicable to get down and walk back, when wechanged again.  And while I was occupied with these deliberations, Iwould fancy an exact resemblance to Joe in some man coming alongthe road towards us, and my heart would beat high.--As if he couldpossibly be there!

We changed again, and yet again, and it was now too late and toofar to go back, and I went on.  And the mists had all solemnly risennow, and the world lay spread before me.

This is the end of the first stage of Pip's expectations.

Chapter XX

The journey from our town to the metropolis was a journey of aboutfive hours.  It was a little past midday when the four-horsestage-coach by which I was a passenger, got into the ravel oftraffic frayed out about the Cross Keys, Wood Street, Cheapside,London.

We Britons had at that time particularly settled that it wastreasonable to doubt our having and our being the best ofeverything:  otherwise, while I was scared by the immensity ofLondon, I think I might have had some faint doubts whether it wasnot rather ugly, crooked, narrow, and dirty.

Mr. Jaggers had duly sent me his address; it was, Little Britain,and he had written after it on his card, "just out of Smithfield,and close by the coach-office."  Nevertheless, a hackney-coachman,who seemed to have as many capes to his greasy great-coat as he wasyears old, packed me up in his coach and hemmed me in with afolding and jingling barrier of steps, as if he were going to takeme fifty miles.  His getting on his box, which I remember to havebeen decorated with an old weather-stained pea-green hammerclothmoth-eaten into rags, was quite a work of time.  It was a wonderfulequipage, with six great coronets outside, and ragged things behindfor I don't know how many footmen to hold on by, and a harrow belowthem, to prevent amateur footmen from yielding to the temptation.

I had scarcely had time to enjoy the coach and to think how like astraw-yard it was, and yet how like a rag-shop, and to wonder whythe horses' nose-bags were kept inside, when I observed thecoachman beginning to get down, as if we were going to stoppresently.  And stop we presently did, in a gloomy street, atcertain offices with an open door, whereon was painted MR. JAGGERS.

"How much?" I asked the coachman.

The coachman answered, "A shilling--unless you wish to make itmore."

I naturally said I had no wish to make it more.

"Then it must be a shilling," observed the coachman.  "I don't wantto get into trouble.  I know him!"  He darkly closed an eye at Mr.Jaggers's name, and shook his head.

When he had got his shilling, and had in course of time completedthe ascent to his box, and had got away (which appeared to relievehis mind), I went into the front office with my little portmanteauin my hand and asked, Was Mr. Jaggers at home?

"He is not," returned the clerk.  "He is in Court at present.  Am Iaddressing Mr. Pip?"

I signified that he was addressing Mr. Pip.

"Mr. Jaggers left word, would you wait in his room.  He couldn't sayhow long he might be, having a case on.  But it stands to reason,his time being valuable, that he won't be longer than he can help."

With those words, the clerk opened a door, and ushered me into aninner chamber at the back.  Here, we found a gentleman with one eye,in a velveteen suit and knee-breeches, who wiped his nose with hissleeve on being interrupted in the perusal of the newspaper.

"Go and wait outside, Mike," said the clerk.

I began to say that I hoped I was not interrupting, when the clerkshoved this gentleman out with as little ceremony as I ever sawused, and tossing his fur cap out after him, left me alone.

Mr. Jaggers's room was lighted by a skylight only, and was a mostdismal place; the skylight, eccentrically pitched like a brokenhead, and the distorted adjoining houses looking as if they hadtwisted themselves to peep down at me through it.  There were not somany papers about, as I should have expected to see; and there weresome odd objects about, that I should not have expected to see,--such as an old rusty pistol, a sword in a scabbard, severalstrange-looking boxes and packages, and two dreadful casts on ashelf, of faces peculiarly swollen, and twitchy about the nose.  Mr.Jaggers's own high-backed chair was of deadly black horsehair,with rows of brass nails round it, like a coffin; and I fancied Icould see how he leaned back in it, and bit his forefinger at theclients.  The room was but small, and the clients seemed to have hada habit of backing up against the wall; the wall, especiallyopposite to Mr. Jaggers's chair, being greasy with shoulders.  Irecalled, too, that the one-eyed gentleman had shuffled forthagainst the wall when I was the innocent cause of his being turnedout.

I sat down in the cliental chair placed over against Mr. Jaggers'schair, and became fascinated by the dismal atmosphere of the place.I called to mind that the clerk had the same air of knowingsomething to everybody else's disadvantage, as his master had.  Iwondered how many other clerks there were up-stairs, and whetherthey all claimed to have the same detrimental mastery of theirfellow-creatures.  I wondered what was the history of all the oddlitter about the room, and how it came there.  I wondered whetherthe two swollen faces were of Mr. Jaggers's family, and, if he wereso unfortunate as to have had a pair of such ill-looking relations,why he stuck them on that dusty perch for the blacks and flies tosettle on, instead of giving them a place at home.  Of course I hadno experience of a London summer day, and my spirits may have beenoppressed by the hot exhausted air, and by the dust and grit thatlay thick on everything.  But I sat wondering and waiting in Mr.Jaggers's close room, until I really could not bear the two castson the shelf above Mr. Jaggers's chair, and got up and went out.

When I told the clerk that I would take a turn in the air while Iwaited, he advised me to go round the corner and I should come intoSmithfield.  So I came into Smithfield; and the shameful place,being all asmear with filth and fat and blood and foam, seemed tostick to me.  So, I rubbed it off with all possible speed by turninginto a street where I saw the great black dome of Saint Paul'sbulging at me from behind a grim stone building which a bystandersaid was Newgate Prison.  Following the wall of the jail, I foundthe roadway covered with straw to deaden the noise of passingvehicles; and from this, and from the quantity of people standingabout smelling strongly of spirits and beer, I inferred that thetrials were on.

While I looked about me here, an exceedingly dirty and partiallydrunk minister of justice asked me if I would like to step in andhear a trial or so:  informing me that he could give me a frontplace for half a crown, whence I should command a full view of theLord Chief Justice in his wig and robes,--mentioning that awfulpersonage like waxwork, and presently offering him at the reducedprice of eighteen-pence.  As I declined the proposal on the plea ofan appointment, he was so good as to take me into a yard and showme where the gallows was kept, and also where people were publiclywhipped, and then he showed me the Debtors' Door, out of whichculprits came to be hanged; heightening the interest of thatdreadful portal by giving me to understand that "four on 'em" wouldcome out at that door the day after to-morrow at eight in themorning, to be killed in a row.  This was horrible, and gave me asickening idea of London; the more so as the Lord Chief Justice'sproprietor wore (from his hat down to his boots and up again to hispocket-handkerchief inclusive) mildewed clothes which hadevidently not belonged to him originally, and which I took it intomy head he had bought cheap of the executioner.  Under thesecircumstances I thought myself well rid of him for a shilling.

I dropped into the office to ask if Mr. Jaggers had come in yet, andI found he had not, and I strolled out again.  This time, I made thetour of Little Britain, and turned into Bartholomew Close; and nowI became aware that other people were waiting about for Mr. Jaggers,as well as I.  There were two men of secret appearance lounging inBartholomew Close, and thoughtfully fitting their feet into thecracks of the pavement as they talked together, one of whom said tothe other when they first passed me, that "Jaggers would do it ifit was to be done."  There was a knot of three men and two womenstanding at a corner, and one of the women was crying on her dirtyshawl, and the other comforted her by saying, as she pulled her ownshawl over her shoulders, "Jaggers is for him, 'Melia, and whatmore could you have?"  There was a red-eyed little Jew who came intothe Close while I was loitering there, in company with a secondlittle Jew whom he sent upon an errand; and while the messenger wasgone, I remarked this Jew, who was of a highly excitabletemperament, performing a jig of anxiety under a lamp-post andaccompanying himself, in a kind of frenzy, with the words, "OJaggerth, Jaggerth, Jaggerth! all otherth ith Cag-Maggerth, give meJaggerth!"  These testimonies to the popularity of my guardian madea deep impression on me, and I admired and wondered more than ever.

At length, as I was looking out at the iron gate of BartholomewClose into Little Britain, I saw Mr. Jaggers coming across the roadtowards me.  All the others who were waiting saw him at the sametime, and there was quite a rush at him.  Mr. Jaggers, putting a handon my shoulder and walking me on at his side without sayinganything to me, addressed himself to his followers.

First, he took the two secret men.

"Now, I have nothing to say to you," said Mr. Jaggers, throwing hisfinger at them.  "I want to know no more than I know.  As to theresult, it's a toss-up.  I told you from the first it was a toss-up.Have you paid Wemmick?"

"We made the money up this morning, sir," said one of the men,submissively, while the other perused Mr. Jaggers's face.

"I don't ask you when you made it up, or where, or whether you madeit up at all.  Has Wemmick got it?"

"Yes, sir," said both the men together.

"Very well; then you may go.  Now, I won't have it!" said MrJaggers, waving his hand at them to put them behind him.  "If yousay a word to me, I'll throw up the case."

"We thought, Mr. Jaggers--" one of the men began, pulling off hishat.

"That's what I told you not to do," said Mr. Jaggers.  "You thought!I think for you; that's enough for you.  If I want you, I know whereto find you; I don't want you to find me.  Now I won't have it.  Iwon't hear a word."

The two men looked at one another as Mr. Jaggers waved them behindagain, and humbly fell back and were heard no more.

"And now you!" said Mr. Jaggers, suddenly stopping, and turning onthe two women with the shawls, from whom the three men had meeklyseparated,--"Oh! Amelia, is it?"

"Yes, Mr. Jaggers."

"And do you remember," retorted Mr. Jaggers, "that but for me youwouldn't be here and couldn't be here?"

"O yes, sir!" exclaimed both women together.  "Lord bless you, sir,well we knows that!"

"Then why," said Mr. Jaggers, "do you come here?"

"My Bill, sir!" the crying woman pleaded.

"Now, I tell you what!" said Mr. Jaggers.  "Once for all.  If youdon't know that your Bill's in good hands, I know it.  And if youcome here bothering about your Bill, I'll make an example of bothyour Bill and you, and let him slip through my fingers.  Have youpaid Wemmick?"

"O yes, sir!  Every farden."

"Very well.  Then you have done all you have got to do.  Say anotherword--one single word--and Wemmick shall give you your moneyback."

This terrible threat caused the two women to fall off immediately.No one remained now but the excitable Jew, who had already raisedthe skirts of Mr. Jaggers's coat to his lips several times.

"I don't know this man!" said Mr. Jaggers, in the same devastatingstrain:  "What does this fellow want?"

"Ma thear Mithter Jaggerth.  Hown brother to Habraham Latharuth?"

"Who's he?" said Mr. Jaggers.  "Let go of my coat."

The suitor, kissing the hem of the garment again beforerelinquishing it, replied, "Habraham Latharuth, on thuthpithion ofplate."

"You're too late," said Mr. Jaggers.  "I am over the way."

"Holy father, Mithter Jaggerth!" cried my excitable acquaintance,turning white, "don't thay you're again Habraham Latharuth!"

"I am," said Mr. Jaggers, "and there's an end of it.  Get out of theway."

"Mithter Jaggerth!  Half a moment!  My hown cuthen'th gone to MithterWemmick at thith prethent minute, to hoffer him hany termth.Mithter Jaggerth!  Half a quarter of a moment!  If you'd have thecondethenthun to be bought off from the t'other thide--at hanythuperior prithe!--money no object!--Mithter Jaggerth--Mithter -!"

My guardian threw his supplicant off with supreme indifference, andleft him dancing on the pavement as if it were red hot.  Withoutfurther interruption, we reached the front office, where we foundthe clerk and the man in velveteen with the fur cap.

"Here's Mike," said the clerk, getting down from his stool, andapproaching Mr. Jaggers confidentially.

"Oh!" said Mr. Jaggers, turning to the man, who was pulling a lockof hair in the middle of his forehead, like the Bull in Cock Robinpulling at the bell-rope; "your man comes on this afternoon.  Well?"

"Well, Mas'r Jaggers," returned Mike, in the voice of a suffererfrom a constitutional cold; "arter a deal o' trouble, I've foundone, sir, as might do."

"What is he prepared to swear?"

"Well, Mas'r Jaggers," said Mike, wiping his nose on his fur capthis time; "in a general way, anythink."

Mr. Jaggers suddenly became most irate.  "Now, I warned you before,"said he, throwing his forefinger at the terrified client, "that ifyou ever presumed to talk in that way here, I'd make an example ofyou.  You infernal scoundrel, how dare you tell ME that?"

The client looked scared, but bewildered too, as if he wereunconscious what he had done.

"Spooney!" said the clerk, in a low voice, giving him a stir withhis elbow.  "Soft Head!  Need you say it face to face?"

"Now, I ask you, you blundering booby," said my guardian, verysternly, "once more and for the last time, what the man you havebrought here is prepared to swear?"

Mike looked hard at my guardian, as if he were trying to learn alesson from his face, and slowly replied, "Ayther to character, orto having been in his company and never left him all the night inquestion."

"Now, be careful.  In what station of life is this man?"

Mike looked at his cap, and looked at the floor, and looked at theceiling, and looked at the clerk, and even looked at me, beforebeginning to reply in a nervous manner, "We've dressed him uplike--" when my guardian blustered out,--

"What?  You WILL, will you?"

("Spooney!" added the clerk again, with another stir.)

After some helpless casting about, Mike brightened and began again:--

"He is dressed like a 'spectable pieman.  A sort of a pastry-cook."

"Is he here?" asked my guardian.

"I left him," said Mike, "a setting on some doorsteps round thecorner."

"Take him past that window, and let me see him."

The window indicated was the office window.  We all three went toit, behind the wire blind, and presently saw the client go by in anaccidental manner, with a murderous-looking tall individual, in ashort suit of white linen and a paper cap.  This guilelessconfectioner was not by any means sober, and had a black eye in thegreen stage of recovery, which was painted over.

"Tell him to take his witness away directly," said my guardian tothe clerk, in extreme disgust, "and ask him what he means bybringing such a fellow as that."

My guardian then took me into his own room, and while he lunched,standing, from a sandwich-box and a pocket-flask of sherry (heseemed to bully his very sandwich as he ate it), informed me whatarrangements he had made for me.  I was to go to "Barnard's Inn," toyoung Mr. Pocket's rooms, where a bed had been sent in for myaccommodation; I was to remain with young Mr. Pocket until Monday;on Monday I was to go with him to his father's house on a visit,that I might try how I liked it.  Also, I was told what my allowancewas to be,--it was a very liberal one,--and had handed to me fromone of my guardian's drawers, the cards of certain tradesmen withwhom I was to deal for all kinds of clothes, and such other thingsas I could in reason want.  "You will find your credit good, Mr.Pip," said my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a wholecaskful, as he hastily refreshed himself, "but I shall by thismeans be able to check your bills, and to pull you up if I find yououtrunning the constable.  Of course you'll go wrong somehow, butthat's no fault of mine."

After I had pondered a little over this encouraging sentiment, Iasked Mr. Jaggers if I could send for a coach?  He said it was notworth while, I was so near my destination; Wemmick should walkround with me, if I pleased.

I then found that Wemmick was the clerk in the next room.  Anotherclerk was rung down from up stairs to take his place while he wasout, and I accompanied him into the street, after shaking handswith my guardian.  We found a new set of people lingering outside,but Wemmick made a way among them by saying coolly yet decisively,"I tell you it's no use; he won't have a word to say to one ofyou;" and we soon got clear of them, and went on side by side.

Chapter XXI

Casting my eyes on Mr. Wemmick as we went along, to see what he waslike in the light of day, I found him to be a dry man, rather shortin stature, with a square wooden face, whose expression seemed tohave been imperfectly chipped out with a dull-edged chisel.  Therewere some marks in it that might have been dimples, if the materialhad been softer and the instrument finer, but which, as it was,were only dints.  The chisel had made three or four of theseattempts at embellishment over his nose, but had given them upwithout an effort to smooth them off.  I judged him to be a bachelorfrom the frayed condition of his linen, and he appeared to havesustained a good many bereavements; for he wore at least fourmourning rings, besides a brooch representing a lady and a weepingwillow at a tomb with an urn on it.  I noticed, too, that severalrings and seals hung at his watch-chain, as if he were quite ladenwith remembrances of departed friends.  He had glittering eyes,--small, keen, and black,--and thin wide mottled lips.  He had hadthem, to the best of my belief, from forty to fifty years.

"So you were never in London before?" said Mr. Wemmick to me.

"No," said I.

"I was new here once," said Mr. Wemmick.  "Rum to think of now!"

"You are well acquainted with it now?"

"Why, yes," said Mr. Wemmick.  "I know the moves of it."

"Is it a very wicked place?" I asked, more for the sake of sayingsomething than for information.

"You may get cheated, robbed, and murdered in London.  But thereare plenty of people anywhere, who'll do that for you."

"If there is bad blood between you and them," said I, to soften itoff a little.

"O!  I don't know about bad blood," returned Mr. Wemmick; "there'snot much bad blood about.  They'll do it, if there's anything to begot by it."

"That makes it worse."

"You think so?" returned Mr. Wemmick.  "Much about the same, I shouldsay."

He wore his hat on the back of his head, and looked straight beforehim:  walking in a self-contained way as if there were nothing inthe streets to claim his attention.  His mouth was such a post-officeof a mouth that he had a mechanical appearance of smiling.  We hadgot to the top of Holborn Hill before I knew that it was merely amechanical appearance, and that he was not smiling at all.

"Do you know where Mr. Matthew Pocket lives?" I asked Mr. Wemmick.

"Yes," said he, nodding in the direction.  "At Hammersmith, west ofLondon."

"Is that far?"

"Well!  Say five miles."

"Do you know him?"

"Why, you're a regular cross-examiner!" said Mr. Wemmick, looking atme with an approving air.  "Yes, I know him.  I know him!"

There was an air of toleration or depreciation about his utteranceof these words that rather depressed me; and I was still lookingsideways at his block of a face in search of any encouraging noteto the text, when he said here we were at Barnard's Inn.  Mydepression was not alleviated by the announcement, for, I hadsupposed that establishment to be an hotel kept by Mr. Barnard, towhich the Blue Boar in our town was a mere public-house.  Whereas Inow found Barnard to be a disembodied spirit, or a fiction, and hisinn the dingiest collection of shabby buildings ever squeezedtogether in a rank corner as a club for Tom-cats.

We entered this haven through a wicket-gate, and were disgorged byan introductory passage into a melancholy little square that lookedto me like a flat burying-ground.  I thought it had the most dismaltrees in it, and the most dismal sparrows, and the most dismalcats, and the most dismal houses (in number half a dozen or so),that I had ever seen.  I thought the windows of the sets of chambersinto which those houses were divided were in every stage ofdilapidated blind and curtain, crippled flower-pot, cracked glass,dusty decay, and miserable makeshift; while To Let, To Let, To Let,glared at me from empty rooms, as if no new wretches ever camethere, and the vengeance of the soul of Barnard were being slowlyappeased by the gradual suicide of the present occupants and theirunholy interment under the gravel.  A frowzy mourning of soot andsmoke attired this forlorn creation of Barnard, and it had strewnashes on its head, and was undergoing penance and humiliation as amere dust-hole.  Thus far my sense of sight; while dry rot and wetrot and all the silent rots that rot in neglected roof and cellar,--rot of rat and mouse and bug and coaching-stables near at handbesides--addressed themselves faintly to my sense of smell, andmoaned, "Try Barnard's Mixture."

So imperfect was this realization of the first of my greatexpectations, that I looked in dismay at Mr. Wemmick.  "Ah!" said he,mistaking me; "the retirement reminds you of the country.  So itdoes me."

He led me into a corner and conducted me up a flight of stairs,--which appeared to me to be slowly collapsing into sawdust, so thatone of those days the upper lodgers would look out at their doorsand find themselves without the means of coming down,--to a set ofchambers on the top floor.  MR. POCKET, JUN., was painted on thedoor, and there was a label on the letter-box, "Return shortly."

"He hardly thought you'd come so soon," Mr. Wemmick explained.  "Youdon't want me any more?"

"No, thank you," said I.

"As I keep the cash," Mr. Wemmick observed, "we shall most likelymeet pretty often.  Good day."

"Good day."

I put out my hand, and Mr. Wemmick at first looked at it as if hethought I wanted something.  Then he looked at me, and said,correcting himself,--

"To be sure!  Yes.  You're in the habit of shaking hands?"

I was rather confused, thinking it must be out of the Londonfashion, but said yes.

"I have got so out of it!" said Mr. Wemmick,--"except at last.  Veryglad, I'm sure, to make your acquaintance.  Good day!"

When we had shaken hands and he was gone, I opened the staircasewindow and had nearly beheaded myself, for, the lines had rottedaway, and it came down like the guillotine.  Happily it was so quickthat I had not put my head out.  After this escape, I was content totake a foggy view of the Inn through the window's encrusting dirt,and to stand dolefully looking out, saying to myself that Londonwas decidedly overrated.

Mr. Pocket, Junior's, idea of Shortly was not mine, for I had nearlymaddened myself with looking out for half an hour, and had writtenmy name with my finger several times in the dirt of every pane inthe window, before I heard footsteps on the stairs.  Gradually therearose before me the hat, head, neckcloth, waistcoat, trousers,boots, of a member of society of about my own standing.  He had apaper-bag under each arm and a pottle of strawberries in one hand,and was out of breath.

"Mr. Pip?" said he.

"Mr. Pocket?" said I.

"Dear me!" he exclaimed.  "I am extremely sorry; but I knew therewas a coach from your part of the country at midday, and I thoughtyou would come by that one.  The fact is, I have been out on youraccount,--not that that is any excuse,--for I thought, coming fromthe country, you might like a little fruit after dinner, and I wentto Covent Garden Market to get it good."

For a reason that I had, I felt as if my eyes would start out of myhead.  I acknowledged his attention incoherently, and began to thinkthis was a dream.

"Dear me!" said Mr. Pocket, Junior.  "This door sticks so!"

As he was fast making jam of his fruit by wrestling with the doorwhile the paper-bags were under his arms, I begged him to allow meto hold them.  He relinquished them with an agreeable smile, andcombated with the door as if it were a wild beast.  It yielded sosuddenly at last, that he staggered back upon me, and I staggeredback upon the opposite door, and we both laughed.  But still I feltas if my eyes must start out of my head, and as if this must be adream.

"Pray come in," said Mr. Pocket, Junior.  "Allow me to lead the way.I am rather bare here, but I hope you'll be able to make outtolerably well till Monday.  My father thought you would get on moreagreeably through to-morrow with me than with him, and might liketo take a walk about London.  I am sure I shall be very happy toshow London to you.  As to our table, you won't find that bad, Ihope, for it will be supplied from our coffee-house here, and (itis only right I should add) at your expense, such being Mr.Jaggers's directions.  As to our lodging, it's not by any meanssplendid, because I have my own bread to earn, and my father hasn'tanything to give me, and I shouldn't be willing to take it, if hehad.  This is our sitting-room,--just such chairs and tables andcarpet and so forth, you see, as they could spare from home.  Youmustn't give me credit for the tablecloth and spoons and castors,because they come for you from the coffee-house.  This is my littlebedroom; rather musty, but Barnard's is musty.  This is yourbedroom; the furniture's hired for the occasion, but I trust itwill answer the purpose; if you should want anything, I'll go andfetch it.  The chambers are retired, and we shall be alone together,but we shan't fight, I dare say.  But dear me, I beg your pardon,you're holding the fruit all this time.  Pray let me take these bagsfrom you.  I am quite ashamed."

As I stood opposite to Mr. Pocket, Junior, delivering him the bags,One, Two, I saw the starting appearance come into his own eyes thatI knew to be in mine, and he said, falling back,--

"Lord bless me, you're the prowling boy!"

"And you," said I, "are the pale young gentleman!"

Chapter XXII

The pale young gentleman and I stood contemplating one another inBarnard's Inn, until we both burst out laughing.  "The idea of itsbeing you!" said he.  "The idea of its being you!" said I.  And thenwe contemplated one another afresh, and laughed again.  "Well!" saidthe pale young gentleman, reaching out his hand good-humoredly,"it's all over now, I hope, and it will be magnanimous in you ifyou'll forgive me for having knocked you about so."

I derived from this speech that Mr. Herbert Pocket (for Herbert wasthe pale young gentleman's name) still rather confounded hisintention with his execution.  But I made a modest reply, and weshook hands warmly.

"You hadn't come into your good fortune at that time?" said HerbertPocket.

"No," said I.

"No," he acquiesced:  "I heard it had happened very lately.  I wasrather on the lookout for good fortune then."

"Indeed?"

"Yes.  Miss Havisham had sent for me, to see if she could take afancy to me.  But she couldn't,--at all events, she didn't."

I thought it polite to remark that I was surprised to hear that.

"Bad taste," said Herbert, laughing, "but a fact.  Yes, she had sentfor me on a trial visit, and if I had come out of it successfully,I suppose I should have been provided for; perhaps I should havebeen what-you-may-called it to Estella."

"What's that?" I asked, with sudden gravity.

He was arranging his fruit in plates while we talked, which dividedhis attention, and was the cause of his having made this lapse of aword.  "Affianced," he explained, still busy with the fruit."Betrothed.  Engaged.  What's-his-named.  Any word of that sort."

"How did you bear your disappointment?" I asked.

"Pooh!" said he, "I didn't care much for it.  She's a Tartar."

"Miss Havisham?"

"I don't say no to that, but I meant Estella.  That girl's hard andhaughty and capricious to the last degree, and has been brought upby Miss Havisham to wreak revenge on all the male sex."

"What relation is she to Miss Havisham?"

"None," said he.  "Only adopted."

"Why should she wreak revenge on all the male sex?  What revenge?"

"Lord, Mr. Pip!" said he.  "Don't you know?"

"No," said I.

"Dear me!  It's quite a story, and shall be saved till dinner-time.And now let me take the liberty of asking you a question.  How didyou come there, that day?"

I told him, and he was attentive until I had finished, and thenburst out laughing again, and asked me if I was sore afterwards?  Ididn't ask him if he was, for my conviction on that point wasperfectly established.

"Mr. Jaggers is your guardian, I understand?" he went on.

"Yes."

"You know he is Miss Havisham's man of business and solicitor, andhas her confidence when nobody else has?"

This was bringing me (I felt) towards dangerous ground.  I answeredwith a constraint I made no attempt to disguise, that I had seen Mr.Jaggers in Miss Havisham's house on the very day of our combat, butnever at any other time, and that I believed he had no recollectionof having ever seen me there.

"He was so obliging as to suggest my father for your tutor, and hecalled on my father to propose it.  Of course he knew about myfather from his connection with Miss Havisham.  My father is MissHavisham's cousin; not that that implies familiar intercoursebetween them, for he is a bad courtier and will not propitiateher."

Herbert Pocket had a frank and easy way with him that was verytaking.  I had never seen any one then, and I have never seen anyone since, who more strongly expressed to me, in every look andtone, a natural incapacity to do anything secret and mean.  Therewas something wonderfully hopeful about his general air, andsomething that at the same time whispered to me he would never bevery successful or rich.  I don't know how this was.  I became imbuedwith the notion on that first occasion before we sat down todinner, but I cannot define by what means.

He was still a pale young gentleman, and had a certain conqueredlanguor about him in the midst of his spirits and briskness, thatdid not seem indicative of natural strength.  He had not a handsomeface, but it was better than handsome:  being extremely amiable andcheerful.  His figure was a little ungainly, as in the days when myknuckles had taken such liberties with it, but it looked as if itwould always be light and young.  Whether Mr. Trabb's local workwould have sat more gracefully on him than on me, may be aquestion; but I am conscious that he carried off his rather oldclothes much better than I carried off my new suit.

As he was so communicative, I felt that reserve on my part would bea bad return unsuited to our years.  I therefore told him my smallstory, and laid stress on my being forbidden to inquire who mybenefactor was.  I further mentioned that as I had been brought up ablacksmith in a country place, and knew very little of the ways ofpoliteness, I would take it as a great kindness in him if he wouldgive me a hint whenever he saw me at a loss or going wrong.

"With pleasure," said he, "though I venture to prophesy that you'llwant very few hints.  I dare say we shall be often together, and Ishould like to banish any needless restraint between us.  Will youdo me the favour to begin at once to call me by my Christian name,Herbert?"

I thanked him and said I would.  I informed him in exchange that myChristian name was Philip.

"I don't take to Philip," said he, smiling, "for it sounds like amoral boy out of the spelling-book, who was so lazy that he fellinto a pond, or so fat that he couldn't see out of his eyes, or soavaricious that he locked up his cake till the mice ate it, or sodetermined to go a bird's-nesting that he got himself eaten bybears who lived handy in the neighborhood.  I tell you what Ishould like.  We are so harmonious, and you have been a blacksmith,---would you mind it?"

"I shouldn't mind anything that you propose," I answered, "but Idon't understand you."

"Would you mind Handel for a familiar name?  There's a charmingpiece of music by Handel, called the Harmonious Blacksmith."

"I should like it very much."

"Then, my dear Handel," said he, turning round as the door opened,"here is the dinner, and I must beg of you to take the top of thetable, because the dinner is of your providing."

This I would not hear of, so he took the top, and I faced him.  Itwas a nice little dinner,--seemed to me then a very Lord Mayor'sFeast,--and it acquired additional relish from being eaten underthose independent circumstances, with no old people by, and withLondon all around us.  This again was heightened by a certain gypsycharacter that set the banquet off; for while the table was, as Mr.Pumblechook might have said, the lap of luxury,--being entirelyfurnished forth from the coffee-house,--the circumjacent region ofsitting-room was of a comparatively pastureless and shiftycharacter; imposing on the waiter the wandering habits of puttingthe covers on the floor (where he fell over them), the meltedbutter in the arm-chair, the bread on the bookshelves, the cheese inthe coal-scuttle, and the boiled fowl into my bed in the next room,--where I found much of its parsley and butter in a state ofcongelation when I retired for the night.  All this made the feastdelightful, and when the waiter was not there to watch me, mypleasure was without alloy.

We had made some progress in the dinner, when I reminded Herbert ofhis promise to tell me about Miss Havisham.

"True," he replied.  "I'll redeem it at once.  Let me introduce thetopic, Handel, by mentioning that in London it is not the custom toput the knife in the mouth,--for fear of accidents,--and that whilethe fork is reserved for that use, it is not put further in thannecessary.  It is scarcely worth mentioning, only it's as well to doas other people do.  Also, the spoon is not generally usedover-hand, but under.  This has two advantages.  You get at yourmouth better (which after all is the object), and you save a gooddeal of the attitude of opening oysters, on the part of the rightelbow."

He offered these friendly suggestions in such a lively way, that weboth laughed and I scarcely blushed.

"Now," he pursued, "concerning Miss Havisham.  Miss Havisham, youmust know, was a spoilt child.  Her mother died when she was a baby,and her father denied her nothing.  Her father was a countrygentleman down in your part of the world, and was a brewer.  I don'tknow why it should be a crack thing to be a brewer; but it isindisputable that while you cannot possibly be genteel and bake,you may be as genteel as never was and brew.  You see it every day."

"Yet a gentleman may not keep a public-house; may he?" said I.

"Not on any account," returned Herbert; "but a public-house maykeep a gentleman.  Well!  Mr. Havisham was very rich and very proud.So was his daughter."

"Miss Havisham was an only child?" I hazarded.

"Stop a moment, I am coming to that.  No, she was not an only child;she had a half-brother.  Her father privately married again--hiscook, I rather think."

"I thought he was proud," said I.

"My good Handel, so he was.  He married his second wife privately,because he was proud, and in course of time she died.  When she wasdead, I apprehend he first told his daughter what he had done, andthen the son became a part of the family, residing in the house youare acquainted with.  As the son grew a young man, he turned outriotous, extravagant, undutiful,--altogether bad.  At last hisfather disinherited him; but he softened when he was dying, andleft him well off, though not nearly so well off as Miss Havisham.--Take another glass of wine, and excuse my mentioning that societyas a body does not expect one to be so strictly conscientious inemptying one's glass, as to turn it bottom upwards with the rim onone's nose."

I had been doing this, in an excess of attention to his recital.  Ithanked him, and apologized.  He said, "Not at all," and resumed.

"Miss Havisham was now an heiress, and you may suppose was lookedafter as a great match.  Her half-brother had now ample means again,but what with debts and what with new madness wasted them mostfearfully again.  There were stronger differences between him andher than there had been between him and his father, and it issuspected that he cherished a deep and mortal grudge against heras having influenced the father's anger.  Now, I come to the cruelpart of the story,--merely breaking off, my dear Handel, to remarkthat a dinner-napkin will not go into a tumbler."

Why I was trying to pack mine into my tumbler, I am wholly unableto say.  I only know that I found myself, with a perseverance worthyof a much better cause, making the most strenuous exertions tocompress it within those limits.  Again I thanked him andapologized, and again he said in the cheerfullest manner, "Not atall, I am sure!" and resumed.

"There appeared upon the scene--say at the races, or the publicballs, or anywhere else you like--a certain man, who made love toMiss Havisham.  I never saw him (for this happened five-and-twentyyears ago, before you and I were, Handel), but I have heard myfather mention that he was a showy man, and the kind of man for thepurpose.  But that he was not to be, without ignorance or prejudice,mistaken for a gentleman, my father most strongly asseverates;because it is a principle of his that no man who was not a truegentleman at heart ever was, since the world began, a truegentleman in manner.  He says, no varnish can hide the grain of thewood; and that the more varnish you put on, the more the grain willexpress itself.  Well!  This man pursued Miss Havisham closely, andprofessed to be devoted to her.  I believe she had not shown muchsusceptibility up to that time; but all the susceptibility shepossessed certainly came out then, and she passionately loved him.There is no doubt that she perfectly idolized him.  He practised onher affection in that systematic way, that he got great sums ofmoney from her, and he induced her to buy her brother out of ashare in the brewery (which had been weakly left him by his father)at an immense price, on the plea that when he was her husband hemust hold and manage it all.  Your guardian was not at that time inMiss Havisham's counsels, and she was too haughty and too much inlove to be advised by any one.  Her relations were poor andscheming, with the exception of my father; he was poor enough, butnot time-serving or jealous.  The only independent one among them,he warned her that she was doing too much for this man, and wasplacing herself too unreservedly in his power.  She took the firstopportunity of angrily ordering my father out of the house, in hispresence, and my father has never seen her since."

I thought of her having said, "Matthew will come and see me at lastwhen I am laid dead upon that table;" and I asked Herbert whetherhis father was so inveterate against her?

"It's not that," said he, "but she charged him, in the presence ofher intended husband, with being disappointed in the hope offawning upon her for his own advancement, and, if he were to go toher now, it would look true--even to him--and even to her.  Toreturn to the man and make an end of him.  The marriage day wasfixed, the wedding dresses were bought, the wedding tour wasplanned out, the wedding guests were invited.  The day came, but notthe bridegroom.  He wrote her a letter--"

"Which she received," I struck in, "when she was dressing for hermarriage?  At twenty minutes to nine?"

"At the hour and minute," said Herbert, nodding, "at which sheafterwards stopped all the clocks.  What was in it, further thanthat it most heartlessly broke the marriage off, I can't tell you,because I don't know.  When she recovered from a bad illness thatshe had, she laid the whole place waste, as you have seen it, andshe has never since looked upon the light of day."

"Is that all the story?" I asked, after considering it.

"All I know of it; and indeed I only know so much, through piecingit out for myself; for my father always avoids it, and, even whenMiss Havisham invited me to go there, told me no more of it than itwas absolutely requisite I should understand.  But I have forgottenone thing.  It has been supposed that the man to whom she gave hermisplaced confidence acted throughout in concert with herhalf-brother; that it was a conspiracy between them; and that theyshared the profits."

"I wonder he didn't marry her and get all the property," said I.

"He may have been married already, and her cruel mortification mayhave been a part of her half-brother's scheme," said Herbert.  "Mind!  I don't know that."

"What became of the two men?" I asked, after again considering thesubject.

"They fell into deeper shame and degradation--if there can bedeeper--and ruin."

"Are they alive now?"

"I don't know."

"You said just now that Estella was not related to Miss Havisham,but adopted.  When adopted?"

Herbert shrugged his shoulders.  "There has always been an Estella,since I have heard of a Miss Havisham.  I know no more.  And now,Handel," said he, finally throwing off the story as it were, "thereis a perfectly open understanding between us.  All that I know aboutMiss Havisham, you know."

"And all that I know," I retorted, "you know."

"I fully believe it.  So there can be no competition or perplexitybetween you and me.  And as to the condition on which you hold youradvancement in life,--namely, that you are not to inquire ordiscuss to whom you owe it,--you may be very sure that it willnever be encroached upon, or even approached, by me, or by any onebelonging to me."

In truth, he said this with so much delicacy, that I felt thesubject done with, even though I should be under his father's rooffor years and years to come.  Yet he said it with so much meaning,too, that I felt he as perfectly understood Miss Havisham to be mybenefactress, as I understood the fact myself.

It had not occurred to me before, that he had led up to the themefor the purpose of clearing it out of our way; but we were so muchthe lighter and easier for having broached it, that I now perceivedthis to be the case.  We were very gay and sociable, and I askedhim, in the course of conversation, what he was?  He replied, "Acapitalist,--an Insurer of Ships."  I suppose he saw me glancingabout the room in search of some tokens of Shipping, or capital,for he added, "In the City."

I had grand ideas of the wealth and importance of Insurers of Shipsin the City, and I began to think with awe of having laid a youngInsurer on his back, blackened his enterprising eye, and cut hisresponsible head open.  But again there came upon me, for myrelief, that odd impression that Herbert Pocket would never be verysuccessful or rich.

"I shall not rest satisfied with merely employing my capital ininsuring ships.  I shall buy up some good Life Assurance shares, andcut into the Direction.  I shall also do a little in the mining way.None of these things will interfere with my chartering a fewthousand tons on my own account.  I think I shall trade," said he,leaning back in his chair, "to the East Indies, for silks, shawls,spices, dyes, drugs, and precious woods.  It's an interestingtrade."

"And the profits are large?" said I.

"Tremendous!" said he.

I wavered again, and began to think here were greater expectationsthan my own.

"I think I shall trade, also," said he, putting his thumbs in hiswaist-coat pockets, "to the West Indies, for sugar, tobacco, andrum.  Also to Ceylon, specially for elephants' tusks."

"You will want a good many ships," said I.

"A perfect fleet," said he.

Quite overpowered by the magnificence of these transactions, Iasked him where the ships he insured mostly traded to at present?

"I haven't begun insuring yet," he replied.  "I am looking aboutme."

Somehow, that pursuit seemed more in keeping with Barnard's Inn.  Isaid (in a tone of conviction), "Ah-h!"

"Yes.  I am in a counting-house, and looking about me."

"Is a counting-house profitable?" I asked.

"To--do you mean to the young fellow who's in it?" he asked, inreply.

"Yes; to you."

"Why, n-no; not to me."  He said this with the air of one carefullyreckoning up and striking a balance.  "Not directly profitable.  Thatis, it doesn't pay me anything, and I have to--keep myself."

This certainly had not a profitable appearance, and I shook my headas if I would imply that it would be difficult to lay by muchaccumulative capital from such a source of income.

"But the thing is," said Herbert Pocket, "that you look about you.That's the grand thing.  You are in a counting-house, you know, andyou look about you."

It struck me as a singular implication that you couldn't be out ofa counting-house, you know, and look about you; but I silentlydeferred to his experience.

"Then the time comes," said Herbert, "when you see your opening.And you go in, and you swoop upon it and you make your capital, andthen there you are!  When you have once made your capital, you havenothing to do but employ it."

This was very like his way of conducting that encounter in thegarden; very like.  His manner of bearing his poverty, too, exactlycorresponded to his manner of bearing that defeat.  It seemed to methat he took all blows and buffets now with just the same air ashe had taken mine then.  It was evident that he had nothing aroundhim but the simplest necessaries, for everything that I remarkedupon turned out to have been sent in on my account from thecoffee-house or somewhere else.

Yet, having already made his fortune in his own mind, he was sounassuming with it that I felt quite grateful to him for not beingpuffed up.  It was a pleasant addition to his naturally pleasantways, and we got on famously.  In the evening we went out for a walkin the streets, and went half-price to the Theatre; and next day wewent to church at Westminster Abbey, and in the afternoon we walkedin the Parks; and I wondered who shod all the horses there, andwished Joe did.

On a moderate computation, it was many months, that Sunday, since Ihad left Joe and Biddy.  The space interposed between myself andthem partook of that expansion, and our marshes were any distanceoff.  That I could have been at our old church in my oldchurch-going clothes, on the very last Sunday that ever was, seemeda combination of impossibilities, geographical and social, solarand lunar.  Yet in the London streets so crowded with people and sobrilliantly lighted in the dusk of evening, there were depressinghints of reproaches for that I had put the poor old kitchen at homeso far away; and in the dead of night, the footsteps of someincapable impostor of a porter mooning about Barnard's Inn, underpretence of watching it, fell hollow on my heart.

On the Monday morning at a quarter before nine, Herbert went to thecounting-house to report himself,--to look about him, too, Isuppose,--and I bore him company.  He was to come away in an hour ortwo to attend me to Hammersmith, and I was to wait about for him.It appeared to me that the eggs from which young Insurers werehatched were incubated in dust and heat, like the eggs ofostriches, judging from the places to which those incipient giantsrepaired on a Monday morning.  Nor did the counting-house whereHerbert assisted, show in my eyes as at all a good Observatory;being a back second floor up a yard, of a grimy presence in allparticulars, and with a look into another back second floor, ratherthan a look out.

I waited about until it was noon, and I went upon 'Change, and Isaw fluey men sitting there under the bills about shipping, whom Itook to be great merchants, though I couldn't understand why theyshould all be out of spirits.  When Herbert came, we went and hadlunch at a celebrated house which I then quite venerated, but nowbelieve to have been the most abject superstition in Europe, andwhere I could not help noticing, even then, that there was muchmore gravy on the tablecloths and knives and waiters' clothes, thanin the steaks.  This collation disposed of at a moderate price(considering the grease, which was not charged for), we went backto Barnard's Inn and got my little portmanteau, and then took coachfor Hammersmith.  We arrived there at two or three o'clock in theafternoon, and had very little way to walk to Mr. Pocket's house.Lifting the latch of a gate, we passed direct into a little gardenoverlooking the river, where Mr. Pocket's children were playingabout.  And unless I deceive myself on a point where my interests orprepossessions are certainly not concerned, I saw that Mr. and Mrs.Pocket's children were not growing up or being brought up, but weretumbling up.

Mrs. Pocket was sitting on a garden chair under a tree, reading,with her legs upon another garden chair; and Mrs. Pocket's twonurse-maids were looking about them while the children played."Mamma," said Herbert, "this is young Mr. Pip."  Upon which Mrs.Pocket received me with an appearance of amiable dignity.

"Master Alick and Miss Jane," cried one of the nurses to two of thechildren, "if you go a bouncing up against them bushes you'll fallover into the river and be drownded, and what'll your pa say then?"

At the same time this nurse picked up Mrs. Pocket's handkerchief,and said, "If that don't make six times you've dropped it, Mum!"Upon which Mrs. Pocket laughed and said, "Thank you, Flopson," andsettling herself in one chair only, resumed her book.  Hercountenance immediately assumed a knitted and intent expression asif she had been reading for a week, but before she could have readhalf a dozen lines, she fixed her eyes upon me, and said, "I hopeyour mamma is quite well?"  This unexpected inquiry put me into sucha difficulty that I began saying in the absurdest way that if therehad been any such person I had no doubt she would have been quitewell and would have been very much obliged and would have sent hercompliments, when the nurse came to my rescue.

"Well!" she cried, picking up the pocket-handkerchief, "if thatdon't make seven times!  What ARE you a doing of this afternoon,Mum!"  Mrs. Pocket received her property, at first with a look ofunutterable surprise as if she had never seen it before, and thenwith a laugh of recognition, and said, "Thank you, Flopson," andforgot me, and went on reading.

I found, now I had leisure to count them, that there were no fewerthan six little Pockets present, in various stages of tumbling up.I had scarcely arrived at the total when a seventh was heard, as inthe region of air, wailing dolefully.

"If there ain't Baby!" said Flopson, appearing to think it mostsurprising.  "Make haste up, Millers."

Millers, who was the other nurse, retired into the house, and bydegrees the child's wailing was hushed and stopped, as if it were ayoung ventriloquist with something in its mouth.  Mrs. Pocket readall the time, and I was curious to know what the book could be.

We were waiting, I supposed, for Mr. Pocket to come out to us; atany rate we waited there, and so I had an opportunity of observingthe remarkable family phenomenon that whenever any of the childrenstrayed near Mrs. Pocket in their play, they always trippedthemselves up and tumbled over her,--always very much to hermomentary astonishment, and their own more enduring lamentation.  Iwas at a loss to account for this surprising circumstance, andcould not help giving my mind to speculations about it, untilby and by Millers came down with the baby, which baby was handed toFlopson, which Flopson was handing it to Mrs. Pocket, when she toowent fairly head foremost over Mrs. Pocket, baby and all, and wascaught by Herbert and myself.

"Gracious me, Flopson!" said Mrs. Pocket, looking off her book for amoment, "everybody's tumbling!"

"Gracious you, indeed, Mum!" returned Flopson, very red in theface; "what have you got there?"

"I got here, Flopson?" asked Mrs. Pocket.

"Why, if it ain't your footstool!" cried Flopson.  "And if you keepit under your skirts like that, who's to help tumbling?  Here!  Takethe baby, Mum, and give me your book."

Mrs. Pocket acted on the advice, and inexpertly danced the infant alittle in her lap, while the other children played about it.  Thishad lasted but a very short time, when Mrs. Pocket issued summaryorders that they were all to be taken into the house for a nap.Thus I made the second discovery on that first occasion, that thenurture of the little Pockets consisted of alternately tumbling upand lying down.

Under these circumstances, when Flopson and Millers had got thechildren into the house, like a little flock of sheep, and Mr.Pocket came out of it to make my acquaintance, I was not muchsurprised to find that Mr. Pocket was a gentleman with a ratherperplexed expression of face, and with his very gray hairdisordered on his head, as if he didn't quite see his way toputting anything straight.

Chapter XXIII

Mr. Pocket said he was glad to see me, and he hoped I was not sorryto see him.  "For, I really am not," he added, with his son's smile,"an alarming personage."  He was a young-looking man, in spite ofhis perplexities and his very gray hair, and his manner seemedquite natural.  I use the word natural, in the sense of its beingunaffected; there was something comic in his distraught way, asthough it would have been downright ludicrous but for his ownperception that it was very near being so.  When he had talked withme a little, he said to Mrs. Pocket, with a rather anxiouscontraction of his eyebrows, which were black and handsome,"Belinda, I hope you have welcomed Mr. Pip?"  And she looked up fromher book, and said, "Yes."  She then smiled upon me in an absentstate of mind, and asked me if I liked the taste of orange-flowerwater?  As the question had no bearing, near or remote, on anyforegone or subsequent transaction, I consider it to have beenthrown out, like her previous approaches, in general conversationalcondescension.

I found out within a few hours, and may mention at once, that Mrs.Pocket was the only daughter of a certain quite accidental deceasedKnight, who had invented for himself a conviction that his deceasedfather would have been made a Baronet but for somebody's determinedopposition arising out of entirely personal motives,--I forgetwhose, if I ever knew,--the Sovereign's, the Prime Minister's, theLord Chancellor's, the Archbishop of Canterbury's, anybody's,--andhad tacked himself on to the nobles of the earth in right of thisquite supposititious fact.  I believe he had been knighted himselffor storming the English grammar at the point of the pen, in adesperate address engrossed on vellum, on the occasion of thelaying of the first stone of some building or other, and forhanding some Royal Personage either the trowel or the mortar.  Bethat as it may, he had directed Mrs. Pocket to be brought up fromher cradle as one who in the nature of things must marry a title,and who was to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domesticknowledge.

So successful a watch and ward had been established over the younglady by this judicious parent, that she had grown up highlyornamental, but perfectly helpless and useless.  With her characterthus happily formed, in the first bloom of her youth she hadencountered Mr. Pocket:  who was also in the first bloom of youth,and not quite decided whether to mount to the Woolsack, or to roofhimself in with a mitre.  As his doing the one or the other was amere question of time, he and Mrs. Pocket had taken Time by theforelock (when, to judge from its length, it would seem to havewanted cutting), and had married without the knowledge of thejudicious parent.  The judicious parent, having nothing to bestow orwithhold but his blessing, had handsomely settled that dower uponthem after a short struggle, and had informed Mr. Pocket that hiswife was "a treasure for a Prince."  Mr. Pocket had invested thePrince's treasure in the ways of the world ever since, and it wassupposed to have brought him in but indifferent interest.  Still,Mrs. Pocket was in general the object of a queer sort of respectfulpity, because she had not married a title; while Mr. Pocket was theobject of a queer sort of forgiving reproach, because he had nevergot one.

Mr. Pocket took me into the house and showed me my room:  which was apleasant one, and so furnished as that I could use it with comfortfor my own private sitting-room.  He then knocked at the doors oftwo other similar rooms, and introduced me to their occupants, byname Drummle and Startop.  Drummle, an old-looking young man of aheavy order of architecture, was whistling.  Startop, younger inyears and appearance, was reading and holding his head, as if hethought himself in danger of exploding it with too strong a chargeof knowledge.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had such a noticeable air of being insomebody else's hands, that I wondered who really was in possessionof the house and let them live there, until I found this unknownpower to be the servants.  It was a smooth way of going on, perhaps,in respect of saving trouble; but it had the appearance of beingexpensive, for the servants felt it a duty they owed to themselvesto be nice in their eating and drinking, and to keep a deal ofcompany down stairs.  They allowed a very liberal table to Mr. andMrs. Pocket, yet it always appeared to me that by far the best partof the house to have boarded in would have been the kitchen,--always supposing the boarder capable of self-defence, for, before Ihad been there a week, a neighboring lady with whom the familywere personally unacquainted, wrote in to say that she had seenMillers slapping the baby.  This greatly distressed Mrs. Pocket, whoburst into tears on receiving the note, and said that it was anextraordinary thing that the neighbors couldn't mind their ownbusiness.

By degrees I learnt, and chiefly from Herbert, that Mr. Pocket hadbeen educated at Harrow and at Cambridge, where he haddistinguished himself; but that when he had had the happiness ofmarrying Mrs. Pocket very early in life, he had impaired hisprospects and taken up the calling of a Grinder.  After grinding anumber of dull blades,--of whom it was remarkable that theirfathers, when influential, were always going to help him topreferment, but always forgot to do it when the blades had left theGrindstone,--he had wearied of that poor work and had come toLondon.  Here, after gradually failing in loftier hopes, he had"read" with divers who had lacked opportunities or neglected them,and had refurbished divers others for special occasions, and hadturned his acquirements to the account of literary compilation andcorrection, and on such means, added to some very moderate privateresources, still maintained the house I saw.

Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had a toady neighbor; a widow lady of thathighly sympathetic nature that she agreed with everybody, blessedeverybody, and shed smiles and tears on everybody, according tocircumstances.  This lady's name was Mrs. Coiler, and I had thehonor of taking her down to dinner on the day of my installation.She gave me to understand on the stairs, that it was a blow to dearMrs. Pocket that dear Mr. Pocket should be under the necessity ofreceiving gentlemen to read with him.  That did not extend to me,she told me in a gush of love and confidence (at that time, I hadknown her something less than five minutes); if they were all likeMe, it would be quite another thing.

"But dear Mrs. Pocket," said Mrs. Coiler, "after her earlydisappointment (not that dear Mr. Pocket was to blame in that),requires so much luxury and elegance--"

"Yes, ma'am," I said, to stop her, for I was afraid she was goingto cry.

"And she is of so aristocratic a disposition--"

"Yes, ma'am," I said again, with the same object as before.

"--That it is hard," said Mrs. Coiler, "to have dear Mr. Pocket'stime and attention diverted from dear Mrs. Pocket."

I could not help thinking that it might be harder if the butcher'stime and attention were diverted from dear Mrs. Pocket; but I saidnothing, and indeed had enough to do in keeping a bashful watchupon my company manners.

It came to my knowledge, through what passed between Mrs. Pocket andDrummle while I was attentive to my knife and fork, spoon, glasses,and other instruments of self-destruction, that Drummle, whoseChristian name was Bentley, was actually the next heir but one to abaronetcy.  It further appeared that the book I had seen Mrs. Pocketreading in the garden was all about titles, and that she knew theexact date at which her grandpapa would have come into the book, ifhe ever had come at all.  Drummle didn't say much, but in hislimited way (he struck me as a sulky kind of fellow) he spoke asone of the elect, and recognized Mrs. Pocket as a woman and asister.  No one but themselves and Mrs. Coiler the toady neighborshowed any interest in this part of the conversation, and itappeared to me that it was painful to Herbert; but it promised tolast a long time, when the page came in with the announcement of adomestic affliction.  It was, in effect, that the cook had mislaidthe beef.  To my unutterable amazement, I now, for the first time,saw Mr. Pocket relieve his mind by going through a performance thatstruck me as very extraordinary, but which made no impression onanybody else, and with which I soon became as familiar as the rest.He laid down the carving-knife and fork,--being engaged in carving,at the moment,--put his two hands into his disturbed hair, andappeared to make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it.When he had done this, and had not lifted himself up at all, hequietly went on with what he was about.

Mrs. Coiler then changed the subject and began to flatter me.  Iliked it for a few moments, but she flattered me so very grosslythat the pleasure was soon over.  She had a serpentine way of comingclose at me when she pretended to be vitally interested in thefriends and localities I had left, which was altogether snaky andfork-tongued; and when she made an occasional bounce upon Startop(who said very little to her), or upon Drummle (who said less), Irather envied them for being on the opposite side of the table.

After dinner the children were introduced, and Mrs. Coiler madeadmiring comments on their eyes, noses, and legs,--a sagacious wayof improving their minds.  There were four little girls, and twolittle boys, besides the baby who might have been either, and thebaby's next successor who was as yet neither.  They were brought inby Flopson and Millers, much as though those two non-commissionedofficers had been recruiting somewhere for children and hadenlisted these, while Mrs. Pocket looked at the young Nobles thatought to have been as if she rather thought she had had thepleasure of inspecting them before, but didn't quite know what tomake of them.

"Here!  Give me your fork, Mum, and take the baby," said Flopson."Don't take it that way, or you'll get its head under the table."

Thus advised, Mrs. Pocket took it the other way, and got its headupon the table; which was announced to all present by a prodigiousconcussion.

"Dear, dear!  Give it me back, Mum," said Flopson; "and Miss Jane,come and dance to baby, do!"

One of the little girls, a mere mite who seemed to have prematurelytaken upon herself some charge of the others, stepped out of herplace by me, and danced to and from the baby until it left offcrying, and laughed.  Then, all the children laughed, and Mr. Pocket(who in the meantime had twice endeavored to lift himself up bythe hair) laughed, and we all laughed and were glad.

Flopson, by dint of doubling the baby at the joints like a Dutchdoll, then got it safely into Mrs. Pocket's lap, and gave it thenut-crackers to play with; at the same time recommending Mrs. Pocketto take notice that the handles of that instrument were not likelyto agree with its eyes, and sharply charging Miss Jane to lookafter the same.  Then, the two nurses left the room, and had alively scuffle on the staircase with a dissipated page who hadwaited at dinner, and who had clearly lost half his buttons at thegaming-table.

I was made very uneasy in my mind by Mrs. Pocket's falling into adiscussion with Drummle respecting two baronetcies, while she ate asliced orange steeped in sugar and wine, and, forgetting all aboutthe baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with thenut-crackers.  At length little Jane, perceiving its young brains tobe imperilled, softly left her place, and with many small artificescoaxed the dangerous weapon away.  Mrs. Pocket finishing her orangeat about the same time, and not approving of this, said to Jane,--

"You naughty child, how dare you?  Go and sit down this instant!"

"Mamma dear," lisped the little girl, "baby ood have put hith eyethout."

"How dare you tell me so?" retorted Mrs. Pocket.  "Go and sit down inyour chair this moment!"

Mrs. Pocket's dignity was so crushing, that I felt quite abashed, asif I myself had done something to rouse it.

"Belinda," remonstrated Mr. Pocket, from the other end of the table,"how can you be so unreasonable?  Jane only interfered for theprotection of baby."

"I will not allow anybody to interfere," said Mrs. Pocket.  "I amsurprised, Matthew, that you should expose me to the affront ofinterference."

"Good God!" cried Mr. Pocket, in an outbreak of desolatedesperation.  "Are infants to be nut-crackered into their tombs, andis nobody to save them?"

"I will not be interfered with by Jane," said Mrs. Pocket, with amajestic glance at that innocent little offender.  "I hope I know mypoor grandpapa's position.  Jane, indeed!"

Mr. Pocket got his hands in his hair again, and this time really didlift himself some inches out of his chair.  "Hear this!" hehelplessly exclaimed to the elements.  "Babies are to benut-crackered dead, for people's poor grandpapa's positions!"  Thenhe let himself down again, and became silent.

We all looked awkwardly at the tablecloth while this was going on.A pause succeeded, during which the honest and irrepressible babymade a series of leaps and crows at little Jane, who appeared to meto be the only member of the family (irrespective of servants) withwhom it had any decided acquaintance.

"Mr. Drummle," said Mrs. Pocket, "will you ring for Flopson?  Jane,you undutiful little thing, go and lie down.  Now, baby darling,come with ma!"

The baby was the soul of honor, and protested with all its might.It doubled itself up the wrong way over Mrs. Pocket's arm, exhibiteda pair of knitted shoes and dimpled ankles to the company in lieuof its soft face, and was carried out in the highest state ofmutiny.  And it gained its point after all, for I saw it through thewindow within a few minutes, being nursed by little Jane.

It happened that the other five children were left behind at thedinner-table, through Flopson's having some private engagement, andtheir not being anybody else's business.  I thus became aware of themutual relations between them and Mr. Pocket, which were exemplifiedin the following manner.  Mr. Pocket, with the normal perplexity ofhis face heightened and his hair rumpled, looked at them for someminutes, as if he couldn't make out how they came to be boardingand lodging in that establishment, and why they hadn't beenbilleted by Nature on somebody else.  Then, in a distant Missionaryway he asked them certain questions,--as why little Joe had thathole in his frill, who said, Pa, Flopson was going to mend it whenshe had time,--and how little Fanny came by that whitlow, who said,Pa, Millers was going to poultice it when she didn't forget.  Then,he melted into parental tenderness, and gave them a shilling apieceand told them to go and play; and then as they went out, with onevery strong effort to lift himself up by the hair he dismissed thehopeless subject.

In the evening there was rowing on the river.  As Drummle andStartop had each a boat, I resolved to set up mine, and to cut themboth out.  I was pretty good at most exercises in which country boysare adepts, but as I was conscious of wanting elegance of stylefor the Thames,--not to say for other waters,--I at once engaged toplace myself under the tuition of the winner of a prize-wherry whoplied at our stairs, and to whom I was introduced by my new allies.This practical authority confused me very much by saying I had thearm of a blacksmith.  If he could have known how nearly thecompliment lost him his pupil, I doubt if he would have paid it.

There was a supper-tray after we got home at night, and I think weshould all have enjoyed ourselves, but for a rather disagreeabledomestic occurrence.  Mr. Pocket was in good spirits, when ahousemaid came in, and said, "If you please, sir, I should wish tospeak to you."

"Speak to your master?" said Mrs. Pocket, whose dignity was rousedagain.  "How can you think of such a thing?  Go and speak to Flopson.Or speak to me--at some other time."

"Begging your pardon, ma'am," returned the housemaid, "I shouldwish to speak at once, and to speak to master."

Hereupon, Mr. Pocket went out of the room, and we made the best ofourselves until he came back.

"This is a pretty thing, Belinda!" said Mr. Pocket, returning with acountenance expressive of grief and despair.  "Here's the cook lyinginsensibly drunk on the kitchen floor, with a large bundle of freshbutter made up in the cupboard ready to sell for grease!"

Mrs. Pocket instantly showed much amiable emotion, and said, "Thisis that odious Sophia's doing!"

"What do you mean, Belinda?" demanded Mr. Pocket.

"Sophia has told you," said Mrs. Pocket.  "Did I not see her with myown eyes and hear her with my own ears, come into the room just nowand ask to speak to you?"

"But has she not taken me down stairs, Belinda," returned Mr.Pocket, "and shown me the woman, and the bundle too?"

"And do you defend her, Matthew," said Mrs. Pocket, "for makingmischief?"

Mr. Pocket uttered a dismal groan.

"Am I, grandpapa's granddaughter, to be nothing in the house?" saidMrs. Pocket.  "Besides, the cook has always been a very nicerespectful woman, and said in the most natural manner when she cameto look after the situation, that she felt I was born to be aDuchess."

There was a sofa where Mr. Pocket stood, and he dropped upon it inthe attitude of the Dying Gladiator.  Still in that attitude hesaid, with a hollow voice, "Good night, Mr. Pip," when I deemed itadvisable to go to bed and leave him.

Chapter XXIV

After two or three days, when I had established myself in my roomand had gone backwards and forwards to London several times, andhad ordered all I wanted of my tradesmen, Mr. Pocket and I had along talk together.  He knew more of my intended career than I knewmyself, for he referred to his having been told by Mr. Jaggers thatI was not designed for any profession, and that I should be wellenough educated for my destiny if I could "hold my own" with theaverage of young men in prosperous circumstances.  I acquiesced, ofcourse, knowing nothing to the contrary.

He advised my attending certain places in London, for theacquisition of such mere rudiments as I wanted, and my investinghim with the functions of explainer and director of all my studies.He hoped that with intelligent assistance I should meet with littleto discourage me, and should soon be able to dispense with any aidbut his.  Through his way of saying this, and much more to similarpurpose, he placed himself on confidential terms with me in anadmirable manner; and I may state at once that he was always sozealous and honorable in fulfilling his compact with me, that hemade me zealous and honorable in fulfilling mine with him.  If hehad shown indifference as a master, I have no doubt I should havereturned the compliment as a pupil; he gave me no such excuse, andeach of us did the other justice.  Nor did I ever regard him ashaving anything ludicrous about him--or anything but what wasserious, honest, and good--in his tutor communication with me.

When these points were settled, and so far carried out as that Ihad begun to work in earnest, it occurred to me that if I couldretain my bedroom in Barnard's Inn, my life would be agreeablyvaried, while my manners would be none the worse for Herbert'ssociety.  Mr. Pocket did not object to this arrangement, but urgedthat before any step could possibly be taken in it, it must besubmitted to my guardian.  I felt that this delicacy arose out ofthe consideration that the plan would save Herbert some expense, soI went off to Little Britain and imparted my wish to Mr. Jaggers.

"If I could buy the furniture now hired for me," said I, "and oneor two other little things, I should be quite at home there."

"Go it!" said Mr. Jaggers, with a short laugh.  "I told you you'd geton.  Well!  How much do you want?"

I said I didn't know how much.

"Come!" retorted Mr. Jaggers.  "How much?  Fifty pounds?"

"O, not nearly so much."

"Five pounds?" said Mr. Jaggers.

This was such a great fall, that I said in discomfiture, "O, morethan that."

"More than that, eh!" retorted Mr. Jaggers, lying in wait for me,with his hands in his pockets, his head on one side, and his eyeson the wall behind me; "how much more?"

"It is so difficult to fix a sum," said I, hesitating.

"Come!" said Mr. Jaggers.  "Let's get at it.  Twice five; will thatdo?  Three times five; will that do?  Four times five; will that do?"

I said I thought that would do handsomely.

"Four times five will do handsomely, will it?" said Mr. Jaggers,knitting his brows.  "Now, what do you make of four times five?"

"What do I make of it?"

"Ah!" said Mr. Jaggers; "how much?"

"I suppose you make it twenty pounds," said I, smiling.

"Never mind what I make it, my friend," observed Mr. Jaggers, with aknowing and contradictory toss of his head.  "I want to know whatyou make it."

"Twenty pounds, of course."

"Wemmick!" said Mr. Jaggers, opening his office door.  "Take Mr. Pip'swritten order, and pay him twenty pounds."

This strongly marked way of doing business made a strongly markedimpression on me, and that not of an agreeable kind.  Mr. Jaggersnever laughed; but he wore great bright creaking boots, and, inpoising himself on these boots, with his large head bent down andhis eyebrows joined together, awaiting an answer, he sometimescaused the boots to creak, as if they laughed in a dry andsuspicious way.  As he happened to go out now, and as Wemmick wasbrisk and talkative, I said to Wemmick that I hardly knew what tomake of Mr. Jaggers's manner.

"Tell him that, and he'll take it as a compliment," answeredWemmick; "he don't mean that you should know what to make of it.--Oh!" for I looked surprised, "it's not personal; it's professional:only professional."

Wemmick was at his desk, lunching--and crunching--on a dry hardbiscuit; pieces of which he threw from time to time into his slitof a mouth, as if he were posting them.

"Always seems to me," said Wemmick, "as if he had set a man-trap andwas watching it.  Suddenly-click--you're caught!"

Without remarking that man-traps were not among the amenities oflife, I said I supposed he was very skilful?

"Deep," said Wemmick, "as Australia."  Pointing with his pen at theoffice floor, to express that Australia was understood, for thepurposes of the figure, to be symmetrically on the opposite spot ofthe globe.  "If there was anything deeper," added Wemmick, bringinghis pen to paper, "he'd be it."

Then, I said I supposed he had a fine business, and Wemmick said,"Ca-pi-tal!"  Then I asked if there were many clerks?  to which hereplied,--

"We don't run much into clerks, because there's only one Jaggers,and people won't have him at second hand.  There are only four ofus.  Would you like to see 'em?  You are one of us, as I may say."

I accepted the offer.  When Mr. Wemmick had put all the biscuit intothe post, and had paid me my money from a cash-box in a safe, thekey of which safe he kept somewhere down his back and produced fromhis coat-collar like an iron-pigtail, we went up stairs.  The housewas dark and shabby, and the greasy shoulders that had left theirmark in Mr. Jaggers's room seemed to have been shuffling up anddown the staircase for years.  In the front first floor, a clerk wholooked something between a publican and a rat-catcher--a largepale, puffed, swollen man--was attentively engaged with three orfour people of shabby appearance, whom he treated asunceremoniously as everybody seemed to be treated who contributedto Mr. Jaggers's coffers.  "Getting evidence together," said Mr.Wemmick, as we came out, "for the Bailey." In the room over that, a little flabby terrier of a clerk with dangling hair (his cropping seemed to have been forgotten when he was a puppy) was similarly engaged with a man with weak eyes, whom Mr. Wemmick presented to me as a smelter who kept his pot always boiling, and who would melt me anything I pleased,--and who was in an excessive white-perspiration, as if he had been trying his art on himself.  In a back room, a high-shouldered man with a face-ache tied up in dirty flannel, who was dressed in old black clothes that bore the appearance of having been waxed, was stooping over his work of making fair copies of the notes of the other two gentlemen, for Mr. Jaggers's own use.

This was all the establishment.  When we went down stairs again,Wemmick led me into my guardian's room, and said, "This you've seenalready."

"Pray," said I, as the two odious casts with the twitchy leer uponthem caught my sight again, "whose likenesses are those?"

"These?" said Wemmick, getting upon a chair, and blowing the dustoff the horrible heads before bringing them down.  "These are twocelebrated ones.  Famous clients of ours that got us a world ofcredit.  This chap (why you must have come down in the night andbeen peeping into the inkstand, to get this blot upon your eyebrow,you old rascal!) murdered his master, and, considering that hewasn't brought up to evidence, didn't plan it badly."

"Is it like him?" I asked, recoiling from the brute, as Wemmickspat upon his eyebrow and gave it a rub with his sleeve.

"Like him?  It's himself, you know.  The cast was made in Newgate,directly after he was taken down.  You had a particular fancy forme, hadn't you, Old Artful?" said Wemmick.  He then explained thisaffectionate apostrophe, by touching his brooch representing thelady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it, andsaying, "Had it made for me, express!"

"Is the lady anybody?" said I.

"No," returned Wemmick.  "Only his game.  (You liked your bit ofgame, didn't you?) No; deuce a bit of a lady in the case, Mr. Pip,except one,--and she wasn't of this slender lady-like sort, and youwouldn't have caught her looking after this urn, unless there wassomething to drink in it."  Wemmick's attention being thus directedto his brooch, he put down the cast, and polished the brooch withhis pocket-handkerchief.

"Did that other creature come to the same end?" I asked.  "He hasthe same look."

"You're right," said Wemmick; "it's the genuine look.  Much as ifone nostril was caught up with a horse-hair and a little fish-hook.Yes, he came to the same end; quite the natural end here, I assureyou.  He forged wills, this blade did, if he didn't also put thesupposed testators to sleep too.  You were a gentlemanly Cove,though" (Mr. Wemmick was again apostrophizing), "and you said youcould write Greek.  Yah, Bounceable!  What a liar you were!  I nevermet such a liar as you!"  Before putting his late friend on hisshelf again, Wemmick touched the largest of his mourning rings andsaid, "Sent out to buy it for me, only the day before."

While he was putting up the other cast and coming down from thechair, the thought crossed my mind that all his personal jewelrywas derived from like sources.  As he had shown no diffidence on thesubject, I ventured on the liberty of asking him the question, whenhe stood before me, dusting his hands.

"O yes," he returned, "these are all gifts of that kind.  Onebrings another, you see; that's the way of it.  I always take 'em.They're curiosities.  And they're property.  They may not be worthmuch, but, after all, they're property and portable.  It don'tsignify to you with your brilliant lookout, but as to myself, myguiding-star always is, "Get hold of portable property"."

When I had rendered homage to this light, he went on to say, in afriendly manner:--

"If at any odd time when you have nothing better to do, youwouldn't mind coming over to see me at Walworth, I could offer youa bed, and I should consider it an honor.  I have not much to showyou; but such two or three curiosities as I have got you mightlike to look over; and I am fond of a bit of garden and asummer-house."

I said I should be delighted to accept his hospitality.

"Thankee," said he; "then we'll consider that it's to come off,when convenient to you.  Have you dined with Mr. Jaggers yet?"

"Not yet."

"Well," said Wemmick, "he'll give you wine, and good wine.  I'llgive you punch, and not bad punch.  And now I'll tell you something.When you go to dine with Mr. Jaggers, look at his housekeeper."

"Shall I see something very uncommon?"

"Well," said Wemmick, "you'll see a wild beast tamed.  Not so veryuncommon, you'll tell me.  I reply, that depends on the originalwildness of the beast, and the amount of taming.  It won't loweryour opinion of Mr. Jaggers's powers.  Keep your eye on it."

I told him I would do so, with all the interest and curiosity thathis preparation awakened.  As I was taking my departure, he asked meif I would like to devote five minutes to seeing Mr. Jaggers "atit?"

For several reasons, and not least because I didn't clearly knowwhat Mr. Jaggers would be found to be "at," I replied in theaffirmative.  We dived into the City, and came up in a crowdedpolice-court, where a blood-relation (in the murderous sense) of thedeceased, with the fanciful taste in brooches, was standing at thebar, uncomfortably chewing something; while my guardian had a womanunder examination or cross-examination,--I don't know which,--andwas striking her, and the bench, and everybody present, with awe.If anybody, of whatsoever degree, said a word that he didn'tapprove of, he instantly required to have it "taken down."  Ifanybody wouldn't make an admission, he said, "I'll have it out ofyou!" and if anybody made an admission, he said, "Now I have gotyou!" The magistrates shivered under a single bite of his finger.Thieves and thief-takers hung in dread rapture on his words, andshrank when a hair of his eyebrows turned in their direction.  Whichside he was on I couldn't make out, for he seemed to me to begrinding the whole place in a mill; I only know that when I stoleout on tiptoe, he was not on the side of the bench; for, he wasmaking the legs of the old gentleman who presided, quite convulsiveunder the table, by his denunciations of his conduct as therepresentative of British law and justice in that chair that day.

Chapter XXV

Bentley Drummle, who was so sulky a fellow that he even took up abook as if its writer had done him an injury, did not take up anacquaintance in a more agreeable spirit.  Heavy in figure, movement,and comprehension,--in the sluggish complexion of his face, and inthe large, awkward tongue that seemed to loll about in his mouth ashe himself lolled about in a room,--he was idle, proud, niggardly,reserved, and suspicious.  He came of rich people down inSomersetshire, who had nursed this combination of qualities untilthey made the discovery that it was just of age and a blockhead.Thus, Bentley Drummle had come to Mr. Pocket when he was a headtaller than that gentleman, and half a dozen heads thicker thanmost gentlemen.

Startop had been spoilt by a weak mother and kept at home when heought to have been at school, but he was devotedly attached to her,and admired her beyond measure.  He had a woman's delicacy offeature, and was--"as you may see, though you never saw her," saidHerbert to me--"exactly like his mother.  It was but natural that Ishould take to him much more kindly than to Drummle, and that, evenin the earliest evenings of our boating, he and I should pullhomeward abreast of one another, conversing from boat to boat,while Bentley Drummle came up in our wake alone, under theoverhanging banks and among the rushes.  He would always creepin-shore like some uncomfortable amphibious creature, even when thetide would have sent him fast upon his way; and I always think ofhim as coming after us in the dark or by the back-water, when ourown two boats were breaking the sunset or the moonlight inmid-stream.

Herbert was my intimate companion and friend.  I presented him witha half-share in my boat, which was the occasion of his often comingdown to Hammersmith; and my possession of a half-share in hischambers often took me up to London.  We used to walk between thetwo places at all hours.  I have an affection for the road yet(though it is not so pleasant a road as it was then), formed in theimpressibility of untried youth and hope.

When I had been in Mr. Pocket's family a month or two, Mr. and Mrs.Camilla turned up.  Camilla was Mr. Pocket's sister.  Georgiana, whomI had seen at Miss Havisham's on the same occasion, also turned up.she was a cousin,--an indigestive single woman, who called herrigidity religion, and her liver love.  These people hated me withthe hatred of cupidity and disappointment.  As a matter of course,they fawned upon me in my prosperity with the basest meanness.Towards Mr. Pocket, as a grown-up infant with no notion of his owninterests, they showed the complacent forbearance I had heard themexpress.  Mrs. Pocket they held in contempt; but they allowed thepoor soul to have been heavily disappointed in life, because thatshed a feeble reflected light upon themselves.

These were the surroundings among which I settled down, and appliedmyself to my education.  I soon contracted expensive habits, andbegan to spend an amount of money that within a few short months Ishould have thought almost fabulous; but through good and evil Istuck to my books.  There was no other merit in this, than my havingsense enough to feel my deficiencies.  Between Mr. Pocket and HerbertI got on fast; and, with one or the other always at my elbow togive me the start I wanted, and clear obstructions out of my road,I must have been as great a dolt as Drummle if I had done less.

I had not seen Mr. Wemmick for some weeks, when I thought I wouldwrite him a note and propose to go home with him on a certainevening.  He replied that it would give him much pleasure, and thathe would expect me at the office at six o'clock.  Thither I went,and there I found him, putting the key of his safe down his back asthe clock struck.

"Did you think of walking down to Walworth?" said he.

"Certainly," said I, "if you approve."

"Very much," was Wemmick's reply, "for I have had my legs under thedesk all day, and shall be glad to stretch them.  Now, I'll tell youwhat I have got for supper, Mr. Pip.  I have got a stewed steak,--which is of home preparation,--and a cold roast fowl,--which isfrom the cook's-shop.  I think it's tender, because the master ofthe shop was a Juryman in some cases of ours the other day, and welet him down easy.  I reminded him of it when I bought the fowl, andI said, "Pick us out a good one, old Briton, because if we hadchosen to keep you in the box another day or two, we could easilyhave done it."  He said to that, "Let me make you a present of thebest fowl in the shop."  I let him, of course.  As far as it goes,it's property and portable.  You don't object to an aged parent, Ihope?"

I really thought he was still speaking of the fowl, until he added,"Because I have got an aged parent at my place."  I then said whatpoliteness required.

"So, you haven't dined with Mr. Jaggers yet?" he pursued, as wewalked along.

"Not yet."

"He told me so this afternoon when he heard you were coming.  Iexpect you'll have an invitation to-morrow.  He's going to ask yourpals, too.  Three of 'em; ain't there?"

Although I was not in the habit of counting Drummle as one of myintimate associates, I answered, "Yes."

"Well, he's going to ask the whole gang,"-- I hardly feltcomplimented by the word,--"and whatever he gives you, he'll giveyou good.  Don't look forward to variety, but you'll haveexcellence.  And there'sa nother rum thing in his house," proceededWemmick, after a moment's pause, as if the remark followed on thehousekeeper understood; "he never lets a door or window be fastenedat night."

"Is he never robbed?"

"That's it!" returned Wemmick.  "He says, and gives it out publicly,"I want to see the man who'll rob me."  Lord bless you, I have heardhim, a hundred times,  if I have heard him once, say to regularcracksmen in our front office, "You know where I live; now, no boltis ever drawn there; why don't you do a stroke of business with me?Come; can't I tempt you?"  Not a man of them, sir, would be boldenough to try it on, for love or money."

"They dread him so much?" said I.

"Dread him," said Wemmick.  "I believe you they dread him.  Not butwhat he's artful, even in his defiance of them.  No silver, sir.Britannia metal, every spoon."

"So they wouldn't have much," I observed, "even if they--"

"Ah!  But he would have much," said Wemmick, cutting me short, "andthey know it.  He'd have their lives, and the lives of scores of'em.  He'd have all he could get.  And it's impossible to say what hecouldn't get, if he gave his mind to it."

I was falling into meditation on my guardian's greatness, whenWemmick remarked:--

"As to the absence of plate, that's only his natural depth, youknow.  A river's its natural depth, and he's his natural depth.  Lookat his watch-chain.  That's real enough."

"It's very massive," said I.

"Massive?" repeated Wemmick.  "I think so.  And his watch is a goldrepeater, and worth a hundred pound if it's worth a penny.  Mr. Pip,there are about seven hundred thieves in this town who know allabout that watch; there's not a man, a woman, or a child, amongthem, who wouldn't identify the smallest link in that chain, anddrop it as if it was red hot, if inveigled into touching it."

At first with such discourse, and afterwards with conversation of amore general nature, did Mr. Wemmick and I beguile the time and theroad, until he gave me to understand that we had arrived in thedistrict of Walworth.

It appeared to be a collection of back lanes, ditches, and littlegardens, and to present the aspect of a rather dull retirement.Wemmick's house was a little wooden cottage in the midst of plotsof garden, and the top of it was cut out and painted like a batterymounted with guns.

"My own doing," said Wemmick.  "Looks pretty; don't it?"

I highly commended it, I think it was the smallest house I eversaw; with the queerest gothic windows (by far the greater part ofthem sham), and a gothic door almost too small to get in at.

"That's a real flagstaff, you see," said Wemmick, "and on Sundays Irun up a real flag.  Then look here.  After I have crossed thisbridge, I hoist it up-so--and cut off the communication."

The bridge was a plank, and it crossed a chasm about four feet wideand two deep.  But it was very pleasant to see the pride with whichhe hoisted it up and made it fast; smiling as he did so, with arelish and not merely mechanically.

"At nine o'clock every night, Greenwich time," said Wemmick, "thegun fires.  There he is, you see!  And when you hear him go, I thinkyou'll say he's a Stinger."

The piece of ordnance referred to, was mounted in a separatefortress, constructed of lattice-work.  It was protected from theweather by an ingenious little tarpaulin contrivance in the natureof an umbrella.

"Then, at the back," said Wemmick, "out of sight, so as not toimpede the idea of fortifications,--for it's a principle with me,if you have an idea, carry it out and keep it up,--I don't knowwhether that's your opinion--"

I said, decidedly.

"--At the back, there's a pig, and there are fowls and rabbits;then, I knock together my own little frame, you see, and growcucumbers; and you'll judge at supper what sort of a salad I canraise.  So, sir," said Wemmick, smiling again, but seriously too, ashe shook his head, "if you can suppose the little place besieged,it would hold out a devil of a time in point of provisions."

Then, he conducted me to a bower about a dozen yards off, but whichwas approached by such ingenious twists of path that it took quitea long time to get at; and in this retreat our glasses were alreadyset forth.  Our punch was cooling in an ornamental lake, on whosemargin the bower was raised.  This piece of water (with an island inthe middle which might have been the salad for supper) was of acircular form, and he had constructed a fountain in it, which, whenyou set a little mill going and took a cork out of a pipe, playedto that powerful extent that it made the back of your hand quitewet.

"I am my own engineer, and my own carpenter, and my own plumber,and my own gardener, and my own Jack of all Trades," said Wemmick,in acknowledging my compliments.  "Well; it's a good thing, youknow.  It brushes the Newgate cobwebs away, and pleases the Aged.You wouldn't mind being at once introduced to the Aged, would you?It wouldn't put you out?"

I expressed the readiness I felt, and we went into the castle.There we found, sitting by a fire, a very old man in a flannelcoat:  clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, butintensely deaf.

"Well aged parent," said Wemmick, shaking hands with him in acordial and jocose way, "how am you?"

"All right, John; all right!" replied the old man.

"Here's Mr. Pip, aged parent," said Wemmick, "and I wish you couldhear his name.  Nod away at him, Mr. Pip; that's what he likes.  Nodaway at him, if you please, like winking!"

"This is a fine place of my son's, sir," cried the old man, while Inodded as hard as I possibly could.  "This is a prettypleasure-ground, sir.  This spot and these beautiful works upon itought to be kept together by the Nation, after my son's time, forthe people's enjoyment."

"You're as proud of it as Punch; ain't you, Aged?" said Wemmick,contemplating the old man, with his hard face really softened;"there's a nod for you;" giving him a tremendous one; "there'sanother for you;" giving him a still more tremendous one; "you likethat, don't you?  If you're not tired, Mr. Pip--though I know it'stiring to strangers--will you tip him one more?  You can't thinkhow it pleases him."

I tipped him several more, and he was in great spirits.  We left himbestirring himself to feed the fowls, and we sat down to our punchin the arbor; where Wemmick told me, as he smoked a pipe, that ithad taken him a good many years to bring the property up to itspresent pitch of perfection.

"Is it your own, Mr. Wemmick?"

"O yes," said Wemmick, "I have got hold of it, a bit at a time.It's a freehold, by George!"

"Is it indeed?  I hope Mr. Jaggers admires it?"

"Never seen it," said Wemmick.  "Never heard of it.  Never seen theAged.  Never heard of him.  No; the office is one thing, and privatelife is another.  When I go into the office, I leave the Castlebehind me, and when I come into the Castle, I leave the officebehind me.  If it's not in any way disagreeable to you, you'lloblige me by doing the same.  I don't wish it professionally spokenabout."

Of course I felt my good faith involved in the observance of hisrequest.  The punch being very nice, we sat there drinking it andtalking, until it was almost nine o'clock.  "Getting near gun-fire,"said Wemmick then, as he laid down his pipe; "it's the Aged'streat."

Proceeding into the Castle again, we found the Aged heating thepoker, with expectant eyes, as a preliminary to the performance ofthis great nightly ceremony.  Wemmick stood with his watch in hishand until the moment was come for him to take the red-hot pokerfrom the Aged, and repair to the battery.  He took it, and went out,and presently the Stinger went off with a Bang that shook the crazylittle box of a cottage as if it must fall to pieces, and madeevery glass and teacup in it ring.  Upon this, the Aged--who Ibelieve would have been blown out of his arm-chair but for holdingon by the elbows--cried out exultingly, "He's fired!  I heerd him!"and I nodded at the old gentleman until it is no figure of speechto declare that I absolutely could not see him.

The interval between that time and supper Wemmick devoted toshowing me his collection of curiosities.  They were mostly of afelonious character; comprising the pen with which a celebratedforgery had been committed, a distinguished razor or two, somelocks of hair, and several manuscript confessions written undercondemnation,--upon which Mr. Wemmick set particular value as being,to use his own words, "every one of 'em Lies, sir."  These wereagreeably dispersed among small specimens of china and glass,various neat trifles made by the proprietor of the museum, and sometobacco-stoppers carved by the Aged.  They were all displayed inthat chamber of the Castle into which I had been first inducted,and which served, not only as the general sitting-room but as thekitchen too, if I might judge from a saucepan on the hob, and abrazen bijou over the fireplace designed for the suspension of aroasting-jack.

There was a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after theAged in the day.  When she had laid the supper-cloth, the bridge waslowered to give her means of egress, and she withdrew for thenight.  The supper was excellent; and though the Castle was rathersubject to dry-rot insomuch that it tasted like a bad nut, andthough the pig might have been farther off, I was heartily pleasedwith my whole entertainment.  Nor was there any drawback on mylittle turret bedroom, beyond there being such a very thin ceilingbetween me and the flagstaff, that when I lay down on my back inbed, it seemed as if I had to balance that pole on my forehead allnight.

Wemmick was up early in the morning, and I am afraid I heard himcleaning my boots.  After that, he fell to gardening, and I saw himfrom my gothic window pretending to employ the Aged, and nodding athim in a most devoted manner.  Our breakfast was as good as thesupper, and at half-past eight precisely we started for LittleBritain.  By degrees, Wemmick got dryer and harder as we went along,and his mouth tightened into a post-office again.  At last, when wegot to his place of business and he pulled out his key from hiscoat-collar, he looked as unconscious of his Walworth property asif the Castle and the drawbridge and the arbor and the lake andthe fountain and the Aged, had all been blown into space togetherby the last discharge of the Stinger.

Chapter XXVI

It fell out as Wemmick had told me it would, that I had an earlyopportunity of comparing my guardian's establishment with that ofhis cashier and clerk.  My guardian was in his room, washing hishands with his scented soap, when I went into the office fromWalworth; and he called me to him, and gave me the invitation formyself and friends which Wemmick had prepared me to receive.  "Noceremony," he stipulated, "and no dinner dress, and say to-morrow."I asked him where we should come to (for I had no idea where helived), and I believe it was in his general objection to makeanything like an admission, that he replied, "Come here, and I'lltake you home with me."  I embrace this opportunity of remarkingthat he washed his clients off, as if he were a surgeon or adentist.  He had a closet in his room, fitted up for the purpose,which smelt of the scented soap like a perfumer's shop.  It had anunusually large jack-towel on a roller inside the door, and hewould wash his hands, and wipe them and dry them all over thistowel, whenever he came in from a police court or dismissed aclient from his room.  When I and my friends repaired to him at sixo'clock next day, he seemed to have been engaged on a case of adarker complexion than usual, for we found him with his headbutted into this closet, not only washing his hands, but laving hisface and gargling his throat.  And even when he had done all that,and had gone all round the jack-towel, he took out his penknife andscraped the case out of his nails before he put his coat on.

There were some people slinking about as usual when we passed outinto the street, who were evidently anxious to speak with him; butthere was something so conclusive in the halo of scented soap whichencircled his presence, that they gave it up for that day.  As wewalked along westward, he was recognized ever and again by someface in the crowd of the streets, and whenever that happened hetalked louder to me; but he never otherwise recognized anybody, ortook notice that anybody recognized him.

He conducted us to Gerrard Street, Soho, to a house on the southside of that street.  Rather a stately house of its kind, butdolefully in want of painting, and with dirty windows.  He took outhis key and opened the door, and we all went into a stone hall,bare, gloomy, and little used.  So, up a dark brown staircase into aseries of three dark brown rooms on the first floor.  There werecarved garlands on the panelled walls, and as he stood among themgiving us welcome, I know what kind of loops I thought they lookedlike.

Dinner was laid in the best of these rooms; the second was hisdressing-room; the third, his bedroom.  He told us that he held thewhole house, but rarely used more of it than we saw.  The table wascomfortably laid--no silver in the service, of course--and at theside of his chair was a capacious dumb-waiter, with a variety ofbottles and decanters on it, and four dishes of fruit for dessert.I noticed throughout, that he kept everything under his own hand,and distributed everything himself.

There was a bookcase in the room; I saw from the backs of thebooks, that they were about evidence, criminal law, criminalbiography, trials, acts of Parliament, and such things.  Thefurniture was all very solid and good, like his watch-chain.  It hadan official look, however, and there was nothing merely ornamentalto be seen.  In a corner was a little table of papers with a shadedlamp:  so that he seemed to bring the office home with him in thatrespect too, and to wheel it out of an evening and fall to work.

As he had scarcely seen my three companions until now,--for he andI had walked together,--he stood on the hearth-rug, after ringingthe bell, and took a searching look at them.  To my surprise, heseemed at once to be principally if not solely interested inDrummle.

"Pip," said he, putting his large hand on my shoulder and moving meto the window, "I don't know one from the other.  Who's the Spider?"

"The spider?" said I.

"The blotchy, sprawly, sulky fellow."

"That's Bentley Drummle," I replied; "the one with the delicateface is Startop."

Not making the least account of "the one with the delicate face,"he returned, "Bentley Drummle is his name, is it?  I like the lookof that fellow."

He immediately began to talk to Drummle:  not at all deterred by hisreplying in his heavy reticent way, but apparently led on by it toscrew discourse out of him.  I was looking at the two, when therecame between me and them the housekeeper, with the first dish forthe table.

She was a woman of about forty, I supposed,--but I may have thoughther younger than she was.  Rather tall, of a lithe nimble figure,extremely pale, with large faded eyes, and a quantity of streaminghair.  I cannot say whether any diseased affection of the heartcaused her lips to be parted as if she were panting, and her faceto bear a curious expression of suddenness and flutter; but I knowthat I had been to see Macbeth at the theatre, a night or twobefore, and that her face looked to me as if it were all disturbedby fiery air, like the faces I had seen rise out of the Witches'caldron.

She set the dish on, touched my guardian quietly on the arm with afinger to notify that dinner was ready, and vanished.  We took ourseats at the round table, and my guardian kept Drummle on one sideof him, while Startop sat on the other.  It was a noble dish of fishthat the housekeeper had put on table, and we had a joint ofequally choice mutton afterwards, and then an equally choice bird.Sauces, wines, all the accessories we wanted, and all of the best,were given out by our host from his dumb-waiter; and when they hadmade the circuit of the table, he always put them back again.Similarly, he dealt us clean plates and knives and forks, for eachcourse, and dropped those just disused into two baskets on theground by his chair.  No other attendant than the housekeeperappeared.  She set on every dish; and I always saw in her face, aface rising out of the caldron.  Years afterwards, I made a dreadfullikeness of that woman, by causing a face that had no other naturalresemblance to it than it derived from flowing hair to pass behinda bowl of flaming spirits in a dark room.

Induced to take particular notice of the housekeeper, both by herown striking appearance and by Wemmick's preparation, I observedthat whenever she was in the room she kept her eyes attentively onmy guardian, and that she would remove her hands from any dish sheput before him, hesitatingly, as if she dreaded his calling herback, and wanted him to speak when she was nigh, if he had anythingto say.  I fancied that I could detect in his manner a consciousnessof this, and a purpose of always holding her in suspense.

Dinner went off gayly, and although my guardian seemed to followrather than originate subjects, I knew that he wrenched the weakestpart of our dispositions out of us.  For myself, I found that I wasexpressing my tendency to lavish expenditure, and to patronizeHerbert, and to boast of my great prospects, before I quite knewthat I had opened my lips.  It was so with all of us, but with noone more than Drummle:  the development of whose inclination to girdin a grudging and suspicious way at the rest, was screwed out ofhim before the fish was taken off.

It was not then, but when we had got to the cheese, that ourconversation turned upon our rowing feats, and that Drummle wasrallied for coming up behind of a night in that slow amphibious wayof his.  Drummle upon this, informed our host that he much preferredour room to our company, and that as to skill he was more than ourmaster, and that as to strength he could scatter us like chaff.  Bysome invisible agency, my guardian wound him up to a pitch littleshort of ferocity about this trifle; and he fell to baring andspanning his arm to show how muscular it was, and we all fell tobaring and spanning our arms in a ridiculous manner.

Now the housekeeper was at that time clearing the table; myguardian, taking no heed of her, but with the side of his faceturned from her, was leaning back in his chair biting the side ofhis forefinger and showing an interest in Drummle, that, to me, wasquite inexplicable.  Suddenly, he clapped his large hand on thehousekeeper's, like a trap, as she stretched it across the table.So suddenly and smartly did he do this, that we all stopped in ourfoolish contention.

"If you talk of strength," said Mr. Jaggers, "I'll show you a wrist.Molly, let them see your wrist."

Her entrapped hand was on the table, but she had already put herother hand behind her waist.  "Master," she said, in a low voice,with her eyes attentively and entreatingly fixed upon him.  "Don't."

"I'll show you a wrist," repeated Mr. Jaggers, with an immovabledetermination to show it.  "Molly, let them see your wrist."

"Master," she again murmured.  "Please!"

"Molly," said Mr. Jaggers, not looking at her, but obstinatelylooking at the opposite side of the room, "let them see both yourwrists.  Show them.  Come!"

He took his hand from hers, and turned that wrist up on the table.She brought her other hand from behind her, and held the two outside by side.  The last wrist was much disfigured,--deeply scarredand scarred across and across.  When she held her hands out shetook her eyes from Mr. Jaggers, and turned them watchfully on everyone of the rest of us in succession.

"There's power here," said Mr. Jaggers, coolly tracing out thesinews with his forefinger.  "Very few men have the power of wristthat this woman has.  It's remarkable what mere force of grip thereis in these hands.  I have had occasion to notice many hands; but Inever saw stronger in that respect, man's or woman's, than these."

While he said these words in a leisurely, critical style, shecontinued to look at every one of us in regular succession as wesat.  The moment he ceased, she looked at him again.  "That'll do,Molly," said Mr. Jaggers, giving her a slight nod; "you have beenadmired, and can go."  She withdrew her hands and went out of theroom, and Mr. Jaggers, putting the decanters on from his dumb-waiter,filled his glass and passed round the wine.

"At half-past nine, gentlemen," said he, "we must break up.  Praymake the best use of your time.  I am glad to see you all.  Mr.Drummle, I drink to you."

If his object in singling out Drummle were to bring him out stillmore, it perfectly succeeded.  In a sulky triumph, Drummle showedhis morose depreciation of the rest of us, in a more and moreoffensive degree, until he became downright intolerable.  Through allhis stages, Mr. Jaggers followed him with the same strange interest.He actually seemed to serve as a zest to Mr. Jaggers's wine.

In our boyish want of discretion I dare say we took too much todrink, and I know we talked too much.  We became particularly hotupon some boorish sneer of Drummle's, to the effect that we weretoo free with our money.  It led to my remarking, with more zealthan discretion, that it came with a bad grace from him, to whomStartop had lent money in my presence but a week or so before.

"Well," retorted Drummle; "he'll be paid."

"I don't mean to imply that he won't," said I, "but it might makeyou hold your tongue about us and our money, I should think."

"You should think!" retorted Drummle.  "Oh Lord!"

"I dare say," I went on, meaning to be very severe, "that youwouldn't lend money to any of us if we wanted it."

"You are right," said Drummle.  "I wouldn't lend one of you asixpence.  I wouldn't lend anybody a sixpence."

"Rather mean to borrow under those circumstances, I should say."

"You should say," repeated Drummle.  "Oh Lord!"

This was so very aggravating--the more especially as I foundmyself making no way against his surly obtuseness--that I said,disregarding Herbert's efforts to check me,--

"Come, Mr. Drummle, since we are on the subject, I'll tell you whatpassed between Herbert here and me, when you borrowed that money."

"I don't want to know what passed between Herbert there and you,"growled Drummle.  And I think he added in a lower growl, that wemight both go to the devil and shake ourselves.

"I'll tell you, however," said I, "whether you want to know or not.We said that as you put it in your pocket very glad to get it, youseemed to be immensely amused at his being so weak as to lend it."

Drummle laughed outright, and sat laughing in our faces, with hishands in his pockets and his round shoulders raised; plainlysignifying that it was quite true, and that he despised us asasses all.

Hereupon Startop took him in hand, though with a much better gracethan I had shown, and exhorted him to be a little more agreeable.Startop, being a lively, bright young fellow, and Drummle being theexact opposite, the latter was always disposed to resent him as adirect personal affront.  He now retorted in a coarse, lumpish way,and Startop tried to turn the discussion aside with some smallpleasantry that made us all laugh.  Resenting this little successmore than anything, Drummle, without any threat or warning, pulledhis hands out of his pockets, dropped his round shoulders, swore,took up a large glass, and would have flung it at his adversary'shead, but for our entertainer's dexterously seizing it at theinstant when it was raised for that purpose.

"Gentlemen," said Mr. Jaggers, deliberately putting down the glass,and hauling out his gold repeater by its massive chain, "I amexceedingly sorry to announce that it's half past nine."

On this hint we all rose to depart.  Before we got to the streetdoor, Startop was cheerily calling Drummle "old boy," as if nothinghad happened.  But the old boy was so far from responding, that hewould not even walk to Hammersmith on the same side of the way; soHerbert and I, who remained in town, saw them going down the streeton opposite sides; Startop leading, and Drummle lagging behind inthe shadow of the houses, much as he was wont to follow in hisboat.

As the door was not yet shut, I thought I would leave Herbert therefor a moment, and run up stairs again to say a word to my guardian.I found him in his dressing-room surrounded by his stock of boots,already hard at it, washing his hands of us.

I told him I had come up again to say how sorry I was that anythingdisagreeable should have occurred, and that I hoped he would notblame me much.

"Pooh!" said he, sluicing his face, and speaking through thewater-drops; "it's nothing, Pip.  I like that Spider though."

He had turned towards me now, and was shaking his head, andblowing, and towelling himself.

"I am glad you like him, sir," said I--"but I don't."

"No, no," my guardian assented; "don't have too much to do withhim.  Keep as clear of him as you can.  But I like the fellow, Pip;he is one of the true sort.  Why, if I was a fortune-teller--"

Looking out of the towel, he caught my eye.

"But I am not a fortune-teller," he said, letting his head dropinto a festoon of towel, and towelling away at his two ears.  "Youknow what I am, don't you?  Good night, Pip."

"Good night, sir."

In about a month after that, the Spider's time with Mr. Pocket wasup for good, and, to the great relief of all the house but Mrs.Pocket, he went home to the family hole.

Chapter XXVII

"MY DEAR MR PIP:--

"I write this by request of Mr. Gargery, for to let you know that heis going to London in company with Mr. Wopsle and would be glad ifagreeable to be allowed to see you.  He would call at Barnard'sHotel Tuesday morning at nine o'clock, when if not agreeable pleaseleave word.  Your poor sister is much the same as when you left.  Wetalk of you in the kitchen every night, and wonder what you aresaying and doing.  If now considered in the light of a liberty,excuse it for the love of poor old days.  No more, dear Mr. Pip, fromyour ever obliged, and affectionate servant,

"BIDDY."

"P.S.  He wishes me most particular to write what larks.  He says youwill understand.  I hope and do not doubt it will be agreeable tosee him, even though a gentleman, for you had ever a good heart, andhe is a worthy, worthy man.  I have read him all, excepting only thelast little sentence, and he wishes me most particular to writeagain what larks."

I received this letter by the post on Monday morning, and thereforeits appointment was for next day.  Let me confess exactly with whatfeelings I looked forward to Joe's coming.

Not with pleasure, though I was bound to him by so many ties; no;with considerable disturbance, some mortification, and a keen senseof incongruity.  If I could have kept him away by paying money, Icertainly would have paid money.  My greatest reassurance was thathe was coming to Barnard's Inn, not to Hammersmith, andconsequently would not fall in Bentley Drummle's way.  I had littleobjection to his being seen by Herbert or his father, for both ofwhom I had a respect; but I had the sharpest sensitiveness as tohis being seen by Drummle, whom I held in contempt.  So, throughoutlife, our worst weaknesses and meannesses are usually committed forthe sake of the people whom we most despise.

I had begun to be always decorating the chambers in some quiteunnecessary and inappropriate way or other, and very expensivethose wrestles with Barnard proved to be.  By this time, the roomswere vastly different from what I had found them, and I enjoyed thehonor of occupying a few prominent pages in the books of aneighboring upholsterer.  I had got on so fast of late, that I hadeven started a boy in boots,--top boots,--in bondage and slavery towhom I might have been said to pass my days.  For, after I had madethe monster (out of the refuse of my washerwoman's family), and hadclothed him with a blue coat, canary waistcoat, white cravat,creamy breeches, and the boots already mentioned, I had to find hima little to do and a great deal to eat; and with both of thosehorrible requirements he haunted my existence.

This avenging phantom was ordered to be on duty at eight on Tuesdaymorning in the hall, (it was two feet square, as charged forfloorcloth,) and Herbert suggested certain things for breakfastthat he thought Joe would like.  While I felt sincerely obliged tohim for being so interested and considerate, I had an oddhalf-provoked sense of suspicion upon me, that if Joe had beencoming to see him, he wouldn't have been quite so brisk about it.

However, I came into town on the Monday night to be ready for Joe,and I got up early in the morning, and caused the sitting-room andbreakfast-table to assume their most splendid appearance.Unfortunately the morning was drizzly, and an angel could not haveconcealed the fact that Barnard was shedding sooty tears outside thewindow, like some weak giant of a Sweep.

As the time approached I should have liked to run away, but theAvenger pursuant to orders was in the hall, and presently I heardJoe on the staircase.  I knew it was Joe, by his clumsy manner ofcoming up stairs,--his state boots being always too big for him,--and by the time it took him to read the names on the other floorsin the course of his ascent.  When at last he stopped outside ourdoor, I could hear his finger tracing over the painted letters ofmy name, and I afterwards distinctly heard him breathing in at thekeyhole.  Finally he gave a faint single rap, and Pepper--such wasthe compromising name of the avenging boy--announced "Mr. Gargery!"I thought he never would have done wiping his feet, and that I musthave gone out to lift him off the mat, but at last he came in.

"Joe, how are you, Joe?"

"Pip, how AIR you, Pip?"

With his good honest face all glowing and shining, and his hat putdown on the floor between us, he caught both my hands and workedthem straight up and down, as if I had been the last-patented Pump.

"I am glad to see you, Joe.  Give me your hat."

But Joe, taking it up carefully with both hands, like a bird's-nestwith eggs in it, wouldn't hear of parting with that piece ofproperty, and persisted in standing talking over it in a mostuncomfortable way.

"Which you have that growed," said Joe, "and that swelled, and thatgentle-folked;" Joe considered a little before he discovered thisword; "as to be sure you are a honor to your king and country."

"And you, Joe, look wonderfully well."

"Thank God," said Joe, "I'm ekerval to most.  And your sister, she'sno worse than she were.  And Biddy, she's ever right and ready.  Andall friends is no backerder, if not no forarder.  'Ceptin Wopsle;he's had a drop."

All this time (still with both hands taking great care of thebird's-nest), Joe was rolling his eyes round and round the room,and round and round the flowered pattern of my dressing-gown.

"Had a drop, Joe?"

"Why yes," said Joe, lowering his voice, "he's left the Church andwent into the playacting.  Which the playacting have likewaysbrought him to London along with me.  And his wish were," said Joe,getting the bird's-nest under his left arm for the moment, andgroping in it for an egg with his right; "if no offence, as I would'and you that."

I took what Joe gave me, and found it to be the crumpled play-billof a small metropolitan theatre, announcing the first appearance,in that very week, of "the celebrated Provincial Amateur of Roscianrenown, whose unique performance in the highest tragic walk of ourNational Bard has lately occasioned so great a sensation in localdramatic circles."

"Were you at his performance, Joe?" I inquired.

"I were," said Joe, with emphasis and solemnity.

"Was there a great sensation?"

"Why," said Joe, "yes, there certainly were a peck of orange-peel.Partickler when he see the ghost.  Though I put it to yourself,sir, whether it were calc'lated to keep a man up to his work with agood hart, to be continiwally cutting in betwixt him and the Ghostwith "Amen!"  A man may have had a misfortun' and been in theChurch," said Joe, lowering his voice to an argumentative andfeeling tone, "but that is no reason why you should put him out atsuch a time.  Which I meantersay, if the ghost of a man's own fathercannot be allowed to claim his attention, what can, Sir?  Stillmore, when his mourning 'at is unfortunately made so small as thatthe weight of the black feathers brings it off, try to keep it onhow you may."

A ghost-seeing effect in Joe's own countenance informed me thatHerbert had entered the room.  So, I presented Joe to Herbert, whoheld out his hand; but Joe backed from it, and held on by thebird's-nest.

"Your servant, Sir," said Joe, "which I hope as you and Pip"--herehis eye fell on the Avenger, who was putting some toast on table,and so plainly denoted an intention to make that young gentlemanone of the family, that I frowned it down and confused him more--"I meantersay, you two gentlemen,--which I hope as you get yourelths in this close spot?  For the present may be a werry good inn,according to London opinions," said Joe, confidentially, "and Ibelieve its character do stand i; but I wouldn't keep a pig in itmyself,--not in the case that I wished him to fatten wholesome andto eat with a meller flavor on him."

Having borne this flattering testimony to the merits of ourdwelling-place, and having incidentally shown this tendency to callme "sir," Joe, being invited to sit down to table, looked all roundthe room for a suitable spot on which to deposit his hat,--as if itwere only on some very few rare substances in nature that it couldfind a resting place,--and ultimately stood it on an extreme cornerof the chimney-piece, from which it ever afterwards fell off atintervals.

"Do you take tea, or coffee, Mr. Gargery?" asked Herbert, who alwayspresided of a morning.

"Thankee, Sir," said Joe, stiff from head to foot, "I'll takewhichever is most agreeable to yourself."

"What do you say to coffee?"

"Thankee, Sir," returned Joe, evidently dispirited by the proposal,"since you are so kind as make chice of coffee, I will not runcontrairy to your own opinions.  But don't you never find it alittle 'eating?"

"Say tea then," said Herbert, pouring it out.

Here Joe's hat tumbled off the mantel-piece, and he started out ofhis chair and picked it up, and fitted it to the same exact spot.As if it were an absolute point of good breeding that it shouldtumble off again soon.

"When did you come to town, Mr. Gargery?"

"Were it yesterday afternoon?" said Joe, after coughing behind hishand, as if he had had time to catch the whooping-cough since hecame.  "No it were not.  Yes it were.  Yes.  It were yesterdayafternoon" (with an appearance of mingled wisdom, relief, andstrict impartiality).

"Have you seen anything of London yet?"

"Why, yes, Sir," said Joe, "me and Wopsle went off straight to lookat the Blacking Ware'us.  But we didn't find that it come up to itslikeness in the red bills at the shop doors; which I meantersay,"added Joe, in an explanatory manner, "as it is there drawd tooarchitectooralooral."

I really believe Joe would have prolonged this word (mightilyexpressive to my mind of some architecture that I know) into aperfect Chorus, but for his attention being providentiallyattracted by his hat, which was toppling.  Indeed, it demanded fromhim a constant attention, and a quickness of eye and hand, verylike that exacted by wicket-keeping.  He made extraordinary playwith it, and showed the greatest skill; now, rushing at it andcatching it neatly as it dropped; now, merely stopping it midway,beating it up, and humoring it in various parts of the room andagainst a good deal of the pattern of the paper on the wall, beforehe felt it safe to close with it; finally splashing it into theslop-basin, where I took the liberty of laying hands upon it.

As to his shirt-collar, and his coat-collar, they were perplexingto reflect upon,--insoluble mysteries both.  Why should a man scrapehimself to that extent, before he could consider himself fulldressed?  Why should he suppose it necessary to be purified bysuffering for his holiday clothes?  Then he fell into suchunaccountable fits of meditation, with his fork midway between hisplate and his mouth; had his eyes attracted in such strangedirections; was afflicted with such remarkable coughs; sat so farfrom the table, and dropped so much more than he ate, and pretendedthat he hadn't dropped it; that I was heartily glad when Herbertleft us for the City.

I had neither the good sense nor the good feeling to know that thiswas all my fault, and that if I had been easier with Joe, Joe wouldhave been easier with me.  I felt impatient of him and out of temperwith him; in which condition he heaped coals of fire on my head.

"Us two being now alone, sir,"--began Joe.

"Joe," I interrupted, pettishly, "how can you call me, sir?"

Joe looked at me for a single instant with something faintly likereproach.  Utterly preposterous as his cravat was, and as hiscollars were, I was conscious of a sort of dignity in the look.

"Us two being now alone," resumed Joe, "and me having theintentions and abilities to stay not many minutes more, I will nowconclude--leastways begin--to mention what have led to my havinghad the present honor.  For was it not," said Joe, with his old airof lucid exposition, "that my only wish were to be useful to you, Ishould not have had the honor of breaking wittles in the companyand abode of gentlemen."

I was so unwilling to see the look again, that I made noremonstrance against this tone.

"Well, sir," pursued Joe, "this is how it were.  I were at theBargemen t'other night, Pip;"--whenever he subsided into affection,he called me Pip, and whenever he relapsed into politeness hecalled me sir; "when there come up in his shay-cart, Pumblechook.Which that same identical," said Joe, going down a new track, "docomb my 'air the wrong way sometimes, awful, by giving out up anddown town as it were him which ever had your infant companionationand were looked upon as a playfellow by yourself."

"Nonsense.  It was you, Joe."

"Which I fully believed it were, Pip," said Joe, slightly tossinghis head, "though it signify little now, sir.  Well, Pip; this sameidentical, which his manners is given to blusterous, come to me atthe Bargemen (wot a pipe and a pint of beer do give refreshment tothe workingman, sir, and do not over stimilate), and his wordwere, 'Joseph, Miss Havisham she wish to speak to you.'"

"Miss Havisham, Joe?"

"'She wish,' were Pumblechook's word, 'to speak to you.'"  Joe satand rolled his eyes at the ceiling.

"Yes, Joe?  Go on, please."

"Next day, sir," said Joe, looking at me as if I were a long wayoff, "having cleaned myself, I go and I see Miss A."

"Miss A., Joe?  Miss Havisham?"

"Which I say, sir," replied Joe, with an air of legal formality, asif he were making his will, "Miss A., or otherways Havisham.  Herexpression air then as follering:  'Mr. Gargery.  You air incorrespondence with Mr. Pip?'  Having had a letter from you, I wereable to say 'I am.'  (When I married your sister, sir, I said 'Iwill;' and when I answered your friend, Pip, I said 'I am.')  'Wouldyou tell him, then,' said she, 'that which Estella has come homeand would be glad to see him.'"

I felt my face fire up as I looked at Joe.  I hope one remote causeof its firing may have been my consciousness that if I had knownhis errand, I should have given him more encouragement.

"Biddy," pursued Joe, "when I got home and asked her fur to writethe message to you, a little hung back.  Biddy says, "I know he willbe very glad to have it by word of mouth, it is holiday time, youwant to see him, go!"  I have now concluded, sir," said Joe, risingfrom his chair, "and, Pip, I wish you ever well and ever prosperingto a greater and a greater height."

"But you are not going now, Joe?"

"Yes I am," said Joe.

"But you are coming back to dinner, Joe?"

"No I am not," said Joe.

Our eyes met, and all the "ir" melted out of that manly heart ashe gave me his hand.

"Pip, dear old chap, life is made of ever so many partings weldedtogether, as I may say, and one man's a blacksmith, and one's awhitesmith, and one's a goldsmith, and one's a coppersmith.Diwisions among such must come, and must be met as they come.  Ifthere's been any fault at all to-day, it's mine.  You and me is nottwo figures to be together in London; nor yet anywheres else butwhat is private, and beknown, and understood among friends.  Itain't that I am proud, but that I want to be right, as you shallnever see me no more in these clothes.  I'm wrong in these clothes.I'm wrong out of the forge, the kitchen, or off th' meshes.  Youwon't find half so much fault in me if you think of me in my forgedress, with my hammer in my hand, or even my pipe.  You won't findhalf so much fault in me if, supposing as you should ever wish tosee me, you come and put your head in at the forge window and seeJoe the blacksmith, there, at the old anvil, in the old burntapron, sticking to the old work.  I'm awful dull, but I hope I'vebeat out something nigh the rights of this at last.  And so GODbless you, dear old Pip, old chap, GOD bless you!"

I had not been mistaken in my fancy that there was a simple dignityin him.  The fashion of his dress could no more come in its way whenhe spoke these words than it could come in its way in Heaven.  Hetouched me gently on the forehead, and went out.  As soon as I couldrecover myself sufficiently, I hurried out after him and looked forhim in the neighboring streets; but he was gone.

Chapter XXVIII

It was clear that I must repair to our town next day, and in thefirst flow of my repentance, it was equally clear that I must stayat Joe's.  But, when I had secured my box-place by to-morrow's coach,and had been down to Mr. Pocket's and back, I was not by any meansconvinced on the last point, and began to invent reasons and makeexcuses for putting up at the Blue Boar.  I should be aninconvenience at Joe's; I was not expected, and my bed would not beready; I should be too far from Miss Havisham's, and she wasexacting and mightn't like it.  All other swindlers upon earth arenothing to the self-swindlers, and with such pretences did I cheatmyself.  Surely a curious thing.  That I should innocently take a badhalf-crown of somebody else's manufacture is reasonable enough;but that I should knowingly reckon the spurious coin of my ownmake as good money!  An obliging stranger, under pretence ofcompactly folding up my bank-notes for security's sake, abstractsthe notes and gives me nutshells; but what is his sleight of handto mine, when I fold up my own nutshells and pass them on myself asnotes!

Having settled that I must go to the Blue Boar, my mind was muchdisturbed by indecision whether or not to take the Avenger.  It wastempting to think of that expensive Mercenary publicly airing hisboots in the archway of the Blue Boar's posting-yard; it was almostsolemn to imagine him casually produced in the tailor's shop, andconfounding the disrespectful senses of Trabb's boy.  On the otherhand, Trabb's boy might worm himself into his intimacy and tell himthings; or, reckless and desperate wretch as I knew he could be,might hoot him in the High Street, My patroness, too, might hear ofhim, and not approve.  On the whole, I resolved to leave the Avengerbehind.

It was the afternoon coach by which I had taken my place, and, aswinter had now come round, I should not arrive at my destinationuntil two or three hours after dark.  Our time of starting from theCross Keys was two o'clock.  I arrived on the ground with a quarterof an hour to spare, attended by the Avenger,--if I may connectthat expression with one who never attended on me if he couldpossibly help it.

At that time it was customary to carry Convicts down to thedock-yards by stage-coach.  As I had often heard of them in thecapacity of outside passengers, and had more than once seen them onthe high road dangling their ironed legs over the coach roof, I hadno cause to be surprised when Herbert, meeting me in the yard, cameup and told me there were two convicts going down with me.  But Ihad a reason that was an old reason now for constitutionallyfaltering whenever I heard the word "convict."

"You don't mind them, Handel?" said Herbert.

"O no!"

"I thought you seemed as if you didn't like them?"

"I can't pretend that I do like them, and I suppose you don'tparticularly.  But I don't mind them."

"See!  There they are," said Herbert, "coming out of the Tap.  What adegraded and vile sight it is!"

They had been treating their guard, I suppose, for they had agaoler with them, and all three came out wiping their mouths ontheir hands.  The two convicts were handcuffed together, and hadirons on their legs,--irons of a pattern that I knew well.  Theywore the dress that I likewise knew well.  Their keeper had a braceof pistols, and carried a thick-knobbed bludgeon under his arm; buthe was on terms of good understanding with them, and stood withthem beside him, looking on at the putting-to of the horses, ratherwith an air as if the convicts were an interesting Exhibition notformally open at the moment, and he the Curator.  One was a tallerand stouter man than the other, and appeared as a matter of course,according to the mysterious ways of the world, both convict andfree, to have had allotted to him the smaller suit of clothes.  Hisarms and legs were like great pincushions of those shapes, and hisattire disguised him absurdly; but I knew his half-closed eye atone glance.  There stood the man whom I had seen on the settle atthe Three Jolly Bargemen on a Saturday night, and who had broughtme down with his invisible gun!

It was easy to make sure that as yet he knew me no more than if hehad never seen me in his life.  He looked across at me, and his eyeappraised my watch-chain, and then he incidentally spat and saidsomething to the other convict, and they laughed and sluedthemselves round with a clink of their coupling manacle, and lookedat something else.  The great numbers on their backs, as if theywere street doors; their coarse mangy ungainly outer surface, as ifthey were lower animals; their ironed legs, apologeticallygarlanded with pocket-handkerchiefs; and the way in which allpresent looked at them and kept from them; made them (as Herberthad said) a most disagreeable and degraded spectacle.

But this was not the worst of it.  It came out that the whole of theback of the coach had been taken by a family removing from London,and that there were no places for the two prisoners but on the seatin front behind the coachman.  Hereupon, a choleric gentleman, whohad taken the fourth place on that seat, flew into a most violentpassion, and said that it was a breach of contract to mix him upwith such villainous company, and that it was poisonous, andpernicious, and infamous, and shameful, and I don't know what else.At this time the coach was ready and the coachman impatient, and wewere all preparing to get up, and the prisoners had come over withtheir keeper,--bringing with them that curious flavor ofbread-poultice, baize, rope-yarn, and hearthstone, which attendsthe convict presence.

"Don't take it so much amiss, sir," pleaded the keeper to the angrypassenger; "I'll sit next you myself.  I'll put 'em on the outsideof the row.  They won't interfere with you, sir.  You needn't knowthey're there."

"And don't blame me," growled the convict I had recognized.  "Idon't want to go.  I am quite ready to stay behind.  As fur as I amconcerned any one's welcome to my place."

"Or mine," said the other, gruffly.  "I wouldn't have incommodednone of you, if I'd had my way."  Then they both laughed, and begancracking nuts, and spitting the shells about.--As I really think Ishould have liked to do myself, if I had been in their place and sodespised.

At length, it was voted that there was no help for the angrygentleman, and that he must either go in his chance company orremain behind.  So he got into his place, still making complaints,and the keeper got into the place next him, and the convicts hauledthemselves up as well as they could, and the convict I hadrecognized sat behind me with his breath on the hair of my head.

"Good by, Handel!" Herbert called out as we started.  I thoughtwhat a blessed fortune it was, that he had found another name forme than Pip.

It is impossible to express with what acuteness I felt theconvict's breathing, not only on the back of my head, but all alongmy spine.  The sensation was like being touched in the marrow withsome pungent and searching acid, it set my very teeth on edge.  Heseemed to have more breathing business to do than another man, andto make more noise in doing it; and I was conscious of growinghigh-shouldered on one side, in my shrinking endeavors to fend himoff.

The weather was miserably raw, and the two cursed the cold.  It madeus all lethargic before we had gone far, and when we had left theHalf-way House behind, we habitually dozed and shivered and weresilent.  I dozed off, myself, in considering the question whether Iought to restore a couple of pounds sterling to this creaturebefore losing sight of him, and how it could best be done.  In theact of dipping forward as if I were going to bathe among thehorses, I woke in a fright and took the question up again.

But I must have lost it longer than I had thought, since, althoughI could recognize nothing in the darkness and the fitful lights andshadows of our lamps, I traced marsh country in the cold damp windthat blew at us.  Cowering forward for warmth and to make me ascreen against the wind, the convicts were closer to me thanbefore.  The very first words I heard them interchange as I becameconscious, were the words of my own thought, "Two One Pound notes."

"How did he get 'em?" said the convict I had never seen.

"How should I know?" returned the other.  "He had 'em stowed awaysomehows.  Giv him by friends, I expect."

"I wish," said the other, with a bitter curse upon the cold, "thatI had 'em here."

"Two one pound notes, or friends?"

"Two one pound notes.  I'd sell all the friends I ever had for one,and think it a blessed good bargain.  Well?  So he says--?"

"So he says," resumed the convict I had recognized,--"it was allsaid and done in half a minute, behind a pile of timber in theDock-yard,--'You're a going to be discharged?'  Yes, I was.  Would Ifind out that boy that had fed him and kep his secret, and give himthem two one pound notes?  Yes, I would.  And I did."

"More fool you," growled the other.  "I'd have spent 'em on a Man,in wittles and drink.  He must have been a green one.  Mean to say heknowed nothing of you?"

"Not a ha'porth.  Different gangs and different ships.  He was triedagain for prison breaking, and got made a Lifer."

"And was that--Honor!--the only time you worked out, in thispart of the country?"

"The only time."

"What might have been your opinion of the place?"

"A most beastly place.  Mudbank, mist, swamp, and work; work, swamp,mist, and mudbank."

They both execrated the place in very strong language, andgradually growled themselves out, and had nothing left to say.

After overhearing this dialogue, I should assuredly have got downand been left in the solitude and darkness of the highway, but forfeeling certain that the man had no suspicion of my identity.Indeed, I was not only so changed in the course of nature, but sodifferently dressed and so differently circumstanced, that it wasnot at all likely he could have known me without accidental help.Still, the coincidence of our being together on the coach, wassufficiently strange to fill me with a dread that some othercoincidence might at any moment connect me, in his hearing, with myname.  For this reason, I resolved to alight as soon as we touchedthe town, and put myself out of his hearing.  This device I executedsuccessfully.  My little portmanteau was in the boot under my feet;I had but to turn a hinge to get it out; I threw it down before me,got down after it, and was left at the first lamp on the firststones of the town pavement.  As to the convicts, they went theirway with the coach, and I knew at what point they would be spiritedoff to the river.  In my fancy, I saw the boat with its convict crewwaiting for them at the slime-washed stairs,--again heard thegruff "Give way, you!" like and order to dogs,--again saw thewicked Noah's Ark lying out on the black water.

I could not have said what I was afraid of, for my fear wasaltogether undefined and vague, but there was great fear upon me.As I walked on to the hotel, I felt that a dread, much exceedingthe mere apprehension of a painful or disagreeable recognition,made me tremble.  I am confident that it took no distinctness ofshape, and that it was the revival for a few minutes of the terrorof childhood.

The coffee-room at the Blue Boar was empty, and I had not onlyordered my dinner there, but had sat down to it, before the waiterknew me.  As soon as he had apologized for the remissness of hismemory, he asked me if he should send Boots for Mr. Pumblechook?

"No," said I, "certainly not."

The waiter (it was he who had brought up the Great Remonstrancefrom the Commercials, on the day when I was bound) appearedsurprised, and took the earliest opportunity of putting a dirty oldcopy of a local newspaper so directly in my way, that I took it upand read this paragraph:--

Our readers will learn, not altogether without interest, inreference to the recent romantic rise in fortune of a youngartificer in iron of this neighborhood (what a theme, by the way,for the magic pen of our as yet not universally acknowledgedtownsman TOOBY, the poet of our columns!) that the youth's earliestpatron, companion, and friend, was a highly respected individualnot entirely unconnected with the corn and seed trade, and whoseeminently convenient and commodious business premises are situatewithin a hundred miles of the High Street.  It is not whollyirrespective of our personal feelings that we record HIM as theMentor of our young Telemachus, for it is good to know that ourtown produced the founder of the latter's fortunes.  Does thethought-contracted brow of the local Sage or the lustrous eye oflocal Beauty inquire whose fortunes?  We believe that Quintin Matsyswas the BLACKSMITH of Antwerp.  VERB.  SAP.

I entertain a conviction, based upon large experience, that if inthe days of my prosperity I had gone to the North Pole, I shouldhave met somebody there, wandering Esquimaux or civilized man, whowould have told me that Pumblechook was my earliest patron and thefounder of my fortunes.

Chapter XXIX

Betimes in the morning I was up and out.  It was too early yet to goto Miss Havisham's, so I loitered into the country on MissHavisham's side of town,--which was not Joe's side; I could gothere to-morrow,--thinking about my patroness, and paintingbrilliant pictures of her plans for me.

She had adopted Estella, she had as good as adopted me, and itcould not fail to be her intention to bring us together.  Shereserved it for me to restore the desolate house, admit thesunshine into the dark rooms, set the clocks a-going and the coldhearths a-blazing, tear down the cobwebs, destroy the vermin,--inshort, do all the shining deeds of the young Knight of romance, andmarry the Princess.  I had stopped to look at the house as I passed;and its seared red brick walls, blocked windows, and strong greenivy clasping even the stacks of chimneys with its twigs andtendons, as if with sinewy old arms, had made up a rich attractivemystery, of which I was the hero.  Estella was the inspiration ofit, and the heart of it, of course.  But, though she had taken suchstrong possession of me, though my fancy and my hope were so setupon her, though her influence on my boyish life and character hadbeen all-powerful, I did not, even that romantic morning, investher with any attributes save those she possessed.  I mention this inthis place, of a fixed purpose, because it is the clew by which Iam to be followed into my poor labyrinth.  According to myexperience, the conventional notion of a lover cannot be alwaystrue.  The unqualified truth is, that when I loved Estella with thelove of a man, I loved her simply because I found her irresistible.Once for all; I knew to my sorrow, often and often, if not always,that I loved her against reason, against promise, against peace,against hope, against happiness, against all discouragement thatcould be.  Once for all; I loved her none the less because I knewit, and it had no more influence in restraining me than if I haddevoutly believed her to be human perfection.

I so shaped out my walk as to arrive at the gate at my old time.When I had rung at the bell with an unsteady hand, I turned my backupon the gate, while I tried to get my breath and keep the beatingof my heart moderately quiet.  I heard the side-door open, and stepscome across the courtyard; but I pretended not to hear, even whenthe gate swung on its rusty hinges.

Being at last touched on the shoulder, I started and turned.  Istarted much more naturally then, to find myself confronted by aman in a sober gray dress.  The last man I should have expected tosee in that place of porter at Miss Havisham's door.

"Orlick!"

"Ah, young master, there's more changes than yours.  But come in,come in.  It's opposed to my orders to hold the gate open."

I entered and he swung it, and locked it, and took the key out."Yes!" said he, facing round, after doggedly preceding me a fewsteps towards the house.  "Here I am!"

"How did you come here?"

"I come her," he retorted, "on my legs.  I had my box broughtalongside me in a barrow."

"Are you here for good?"

"I ain't here for harm, young master, I suppose?"

I was not so sure of that.  I had leisure to entertain the retort inmy mind, while he slowly lifted his heavy glance from the pavement,up my legs and arms, to my face.

"Then you have left the forge?" I said.

"Do this look like a forge?" replied Orlick, sending his glance allround him with an air of injury.  "Now, do it look like it?"

I asked him how long he had left Gargery's forge?

"One day is so like another here," he replied, "that I don't knowwithout casting it up.  However, I come here some time since youleft."

"I could have told you that, Orlick."

"Ah!" said he, dryly.  "But then you've got to be a scholar."

By this time we had come to the house, where I found his room to beone just within the side-door, with a little window in it lookingon the courtyard.  In its small proportions, it was not unlike thekind of place usually assigned to a gate-porter in Paris.  Certainkeys were hanging on the wall, to which he now added the gate key;and his patchwork-covered bed was in a little inner division orrecess.  The whole had a slovenly, confined, and sleepy look, like acage for a human dormouse; while he, looming dark and heavy in theshadow of a corner by the window, looked like the human dormousefor whom it was fitted up,--as indeed he was.

"I never saw this room before," I remarked; "but there used to beno Porter here."

"No," said he; "not till it got about that there was no protectionon the premises, and it come to be considered dangerous, withconvicts and Tag and Rag and Bobtail going up and down.  And then Iwas recommended to the place as a man who could give another man asgood as he brought, and I took it.  It's easier than bellowsing andhammering.--That's loaded, that is."

My eye had been caught by a gun with a brass-bound stock over thechimney-piece, and his eye had followed mine.

"Well," said I, not desirous of more conversation, "shall I go upto Miss Havisham?"

"Burn me, if I know!" he retorted, first stretching himself andthen shaking himself; "my orders ends here, young master.  I givethis here bell a rap with this here hammer, and you go on along thepassage till you meet somebody."

"I am expected, I believe?"

"Burn me twice over, if I can say!" said he.

Upon that, I turned down the long passage which I had first troddenin my thick boots, and he made his bell sound.  At the end of thepassage, while the bell was still reverberating, I found SarahPocket, who appeared to have now become constitutionally green andyellow by reason of me.

"Oh!" said she.  "You, is it, Mr. Pip?"

"It is, Miss Pocket.  I am glad to tell you that Mr. Pocket andfamily are all well."

"Are they any wiser?" said Sarah, with a dismal shake of the head;"they had better be wiser, than well.  Ah, Matthew, Matthew!  You knowyour way, sir?"

Tolerably, for I had gone up the staircase in the dark, many atime.  I ascended it now, in lighter boots than of yore, and tappedin my old way at the door of Miss Havisham's room.  "Pip's rap," Iheard her say, immediately; "come in, Pip."

She was in her chair near the old table, in the old dress, with hertwo hands crossed on her stick, her chin resting on them, and hereyes on the fire.  Sitting near her, with the white shoe, that hadnever been worn, in her hand, and her head bent as she looked atit, was an elegant lady whom I had never seen.

"Come in, Pip," Miss Havisham continued to mutter, without lookinground or up; "come in, Pip, how do you do, Pip?  so you kiss my handas if I were a queen, eh?--Well?"

She looked up at me suddenly, only moving her eyes, and repeated ina grimly playful manner,--

"Well?"

"I heard, Miss Havisham," said I, rather at a loss, "that you wereso kind as to wish me to come and see you, and I came directly."

"Well?"

The lady whom I had never seen before, lifted up her eyes andlooked archly at me, and then I saw that the eyes were Estella'seyes.  But she was so much changed, was so much more beautiful, somuch more womanly, in all things winning admiration, had made suchwonderful advance, that I seemed to have made none.  I fancied, as Ilooked at her, that I slipped hopelessly back into the coarse andcommon boy again.  O the sense of distance and disparity that cameupon me, and the inaccessibility that came about her!

She gave me her hand.  I stammered something about the pleasure Ifelt in seeing her again, and about my having looked forward to it,for a long, long time.

"Do you find her much changed, Pip?" asked Miss Havisham, with hergreedy look, and striking her stick upon a chair that stood betweenthem, as a sign to me to sit down there.

"When I came in, Miss Havisham, I thought there was nothing ofEstella in the face or figure; but now it all settles down socuriously into the old--"

"What?  You are not going to say into the old Estella?" MissHavisham interrupted.  "She was proud and insulting, and you wantedto go away from her.  Don't you remember?"

I said confusedly that that was long ago, and that I knew no betterthen, and the like.  Estella smiled with perfect composure, and saidshe had no doubt of my having been quite right, and of her havingbeen very disagreeable.

"Is he changed?" Miss Havisham asked her.

"Very much," said Estella, looking at me.

"Less coarse and common?" said Miss Havisham, playing withEstella's hair.

Estella laughed, and looked at the shoe in her hand, and laughedagain, and looked at me, and put the shoe down.  She treated me as aboy still, but she lured me on.

We sat in the dreamy room among the old strange influences whichhad so wrought upon me, and I learnt that she had but just comehome from France, and that she was going to London.  Proud andwilful as of old, she had brought those qualities into suchsubjection to her beauty that it was impossible and out of nature--or I thought so--to separate them from her beauty.  Truly it wasimpossible to dissociate her presence from all those wretchedhankerings after money and gentility that had disturbed my boyhood,--from all those ill-regulated aspirations that had first made meashamed of home and Joe,--from all those visions that had raisedher face in the glowing fire, struck it out of the iron on theanvil, extracted it from the darkness of night to look in at thewooden window of the forge, and flit away.  In a word, it wasimpossible for me to separate her, in the past or in the present,from the innermost life of my life.

It was settled that I should stay there all the rest of the day,and return to the hotel at night, and to London to-morrow.  When wehad conversed for a while, Miss Havisham sent us two out to walk inthe neglected garden:  on our coming in by and by, she said, Ishould wheel her about a little, as in times of yore.

So, Estella and I went out into the garden by the gate throughwhich I had strayed to my encounter with the pale young gentleman,now Herbert; I, trembling in spirit and worshipping the very hem ofher dress; she, quite composed and most decidedly not worshippingthe hem of mine.  As we drew near to the place of encounter, shestopped and said,--

"I must have been a singular little creature to hide and see thatfight that day; but I did, and I enjoyed it very much."

"You rewarded me very much."

"Did I?" she replied, in an incidental and forgetful way.  "Iremember I entertained a great objection to your adversary, becauseI took it ill that he should be brought here to pester me with hiscompany."

"He and I are great friends now."

"Are you?  I think I recollect though, that you read with hisfather?"

"Yes."

I made the admission with reluctance, for it seemed to have aboyish look, and she already treated me more than enough like aboy.

"Since your change of fortune and prospects, you have changed yourcompanions," said Estella.

"Naturally," said I.

"And necessarily," she added, in a haughty tone; "what was fitcompany for you once, would be quite unfit company for you now."

In my conscience, I doubt very much whether I had any lingeringintention left of going to see Joe; but if I had, this observationput it to flight.

"You had no idea of your impending good fortune, in those times?"said Estella, with a slight wave of her hand, signifying in thefighting times.

"Not the least."

The air of completeness and superiority with which she walked at myside, and the air of youthfulness and submission with which Iwalked at hers, made a contrast that I strongly felt.  It would haverankled in me more than it did, if I had not regarded myself aseliciting it by being so set apart for her and assigned to her.

The garden was too overgrown and rank for walking in with ease, andafter we had made the round of it twice or thrice, we came outagain into the brewery yard.  I showed her to a nicety where I hadseen her walking on the casks, that first old day, and she said,with a cold and careless look in that direction, "Did I?"  Ireminded her where she had come out of the house and given me mymeat and drink, and she said, "I don't remember."  "Not rememberthat you made me cry?" said I.  "No," said she, and shook her headand looked about her.  I verily believe that her not remembering andnot minding in the least, made me cry again, inwardly,--and that isthe sharpest crying of all.

"You must know," said Estella, condescending to me as a brilliantand beautiful woman might, "that I have no heart,--if that hasanything to do with my memory."

I got through some jargon to the effect that I took the liberty ofdoubting that.  That I knew better.  That there could be no suchbeauty without it.

"Oh!  I have a heart to be stabbed in or shot in, I have no doubt,"said Estella, "and of course if it ceased to beat I should ceaseto be.  But you know what I mean.  I have no softness there, no--sympathy-sentiment--nonsense."

What was it that was borne in upon my mind when she stood still andlooked attentively at me?  Anything that I had seen in MissHavisham?  No.  In some of her looks and gestures there was thattinge of resemblance to Miss Havisham which may often be noticed tohave been acquired by children, from grown person with whom theyhave been much associated and secluded, and which, when childhoodis passed, will produce a remarkable occasional likeness ofexpression between faces that are otherwise quite different.  Andyet I could not trace this to Miss Havisham.  I looked again, andthough she was still looking at me, the suggestion was gone.

What was it?

"I am serious," said Estella, not so much with a frown (for herbrow was smooth) as with a darkening of her face; "if we are to bethrown much together, you had better believe it at once.  No!"imperiously stopping me as I opened my lips.  "I have not bestowedmy tenderness anywhere.  I have never had any such thing."

In another moment we were in the brewery, so long disused, and shepointed to the high gallery where I had seen her going out on thatsame first day, and told me she remembered to have been up there,and to have seen me standing scared below.  As my eyes followed herwhite hand, again the same dim suggestion that I could not possiblygrasp crossed me.  My involuntary start occasioned her to lay herhand upon my arm.  Instantly the ghost passed once more and wasgone.

What was it?

"What is the matter?" asked Estella.  "Are you scared again?"

"I should be, if I believed what you said just now," I replied, toturn it off.

"Then you don't?  Very well.  It is said, at any rate.  Miss Havishamwill soon be expecting you at your old post, though I think thatmight be laid aside now, with other old belongings.  Let us make onemore round of the garden, and then go in.  Come!  You shall not shedtears for my cruelty to-day; you shall be my Page, and give me yourshoulder."

Her handsome dress had trailed upon the ground.  She held it in onehand now, and with the other lightly touched my shoulder as wewalked.  We walked round the ruined garden twice or thrice more, andit was all in bloom for me.  If the green and yellow growth of weedin the chinks of the old wall had been the most precious flowersthat ever blew, it could not have been more cherished in myremembrance.

There was no discrepancy of years between us to remove her farfrom me; we were of nearly the same age, though of course the agetold for more in her case than in mine; but the air ofinaccessibility which her beauty and her manner gave her, tormentedme in the midst of my delight, and at the height of the assurance Ifelt that our patroness had chosen us for one another.  Wretchedboy!

At last we went back into the house, and there I heard, withsurprise, that my guardian had come down to see Miss Havisham onbusiness, and would come back to dinner.  The old wintry branches ofchandeliers in the room where the mouldering table was spread hadbeen lighted while we were out, and Miss Havisham was in her chairand waiting for me.

It was like pushing the chair itself back into the past, when webegan the old slow circuit round about the ashes of the bridalfeast.  But, in the funereal room, with that figure of the gravefallen back in the chair fixing its eyes upon her, Estella lookedmore bright and beautiful than before, and I was under strongerenchantment.

The time so melted away, that our early dinner-hour drew close athand, and Estella left us to prepare herself.  We had stopped nearthe centre of the long table, and Miss Havisham, with one of herwithered arms stretched out of the chair, rested that clenched handupon the yellow cloth.  As Estella looked back over her shoulderbefore going out at the door, Miss Havisham kissed that hand toher, with a ravenous intensity that was of its kind quite dreadful.

Then, Estella being gone and we two left alone, she turned to me,and said in a whisper,--

"Is she beautiful, graceful, well-grown?  Do you admire her?"

"Everybody must who sees her, Miss Havisham."

She drew an arm round my neck, and drew my head close down to hersas she sat in the chair.  "Love her, love her, love her!  How doesshe use you?"

Before I could answer (if I could have answered so difficult aquestion at all) she repeated, "Love her, love her, love her!  Ifshe favors you, love her.  If she wounds you, love her.  If shetears your heart to pieces,--and as it gets older and stronger itwill tear deeper,--love her, love her, love her!"

Never had I seen such passionate eagerness as was joined to herutterance of these words.  I could feel the muscles of the thin armround my neck swell with the vehemence that possessed her.

"Hear me, Pip!  I adopted her, to be loved.  I bred her and educatedher, to be loved.  I developed her into what she is, that she mightbe loved.  Love her!"

She said the word often enough, and there could be no doubt thatshe meant to say it; but if the often repeated word had been hateinstead of love--despair--revenge--dire death--it could nothave sounded from her lips more like a curse.

"I'll tell you," said she, in the same hurried passionate whisper,"what real love is.  It is blind devotion, unquestioningself-humiliation, utter submission, trust and belief againstyourself and against the whole world, giving up your whole heartand soul to the smiter--as I did!"

When she came to that, and to a wild cry that followed that, Icaught her round the waist.  For she rose up in the chair, in hershroud of a dress, and struck at the air as if she would as soonhave struck herself against the wall and fallen dead.

All this passed in a few seconds.  As I drew her down into herchair, I was conscious of a scent that I knew, and turning, saw myguardian in the room.

He always carried (I have not yet mentioned it, I think) apocket-handkerchief of rich silk and of imposing proportions, whichwas of great value to him in his profession.  I have seen him soterrify a client or a witness by ceremoniously unfolding thispocket-handkerchief as if he were immediately going to blow hisnose, and then pausing, as if he knew he should not have time to doit before such client or witness committed himself, that theself-committal has followed directly, quite as a matter of course.When I saw him in the room he had this expressivepocket-handkerchief in both hands, and was looking at us.  On meetingmy eye, he said plainly, by a momentary and silent pause in thatattitude, "Indeed?  Singular!" and then put the handkerchief to itsright use with wonderful effect.

Miss Havisham had seen him as soon as I, and was (like everybodyelse) afraid of him.  She made a strong attempt to compose herself,and stammered that he was as punctual as ever.

"As punctual as ever," he repeated, coming up to us.  "(How do youdo, Pip?  Shall I give you a ride, Miss Havisham?  Once round?)And so you are here, Pip?"

I told him when I had arrived, and how Miss Havisham had wished meto come and see Estella.  To which he replied, "Ah!  Very fine younglady!"  Then he pushed Miss Havisham in her chair before him, withone of his large hands, and put the other in his trousers-pocket asif the pocket were full of secrets.

"Well, Pip!  How often have you seen Miss Estella before?" said he,when he came to a stop.

"How often?"

"Ah!  How many times?  Ten thousand times?"

"Oh!  Certainly not so many."

"Twice?"

"Jaggers," interposed Miss Havisham, much to my relief, "leave myPip alone, and go with him to your dinner."

He complied, and we groped our way down the dark stairs together.While we were still on our way to those detached apartments acrossthe paved yard at the back, he asked me how often I had seen MissHavisham eat and drink; offering me a breadth of choice, as usual,between a hundred times and once.

I considered, and said, "Never."

"And never will, Pip," he retorted, with a frowning smile.  "She hasnever allowed herself to be seen doing either, since she lived thispresent life of hers.  She wanders about in the night, and then layshands on such food as she takes."

"Pray, sir," said I, "may I ask you a question?"

"You may," said he, "and I may decline to answer it.  Put yourquestion."

"Estella's name.  Is it Havisham or--?"  I had nothing to add.

"Or what?" said he.

"Is it Havisham?"

"It is Havisham."

This brought us to the dinner-table, where she and Sarah Pocketawaited us.  Mr. Jaggers presided, Estella sat opposite to him, Ifaced my green and yellow friend.  We dined very well, and werewaited on by a maid-servant whom I had never seen in all my comingsand goings, but who, for anything I know, had been in thatmysterious house the whole time.  After dinner a bottle of choiceold port was placed before my guardian (he was evidently wellacquainted with the vintage), and the two ladies left us.

Anything to equal the determined reticence of Mr. Jaggers under thatroof I never saw elsewhere, even in him.  He kept his very looks tohimself, and scarcely directed his eyes to Estella's face onceduring dinner.  When she spoke to him, he listened, and in duecourse answered, but never looked at her, that I could see.  On theother hand, she often looked at him, with interest and curiosity,if not distrust, but his face never, showed the leastconsciousness.  Throughout dinner he took a dry delight in makingSarah Pocket greener and yellower, by often referring inconversation with me to my expectations; but here, again, he showedno consciousness, and even made it appear that he extorted--andeven did extort, though I don't know how--those references out ofmy innocent self.

And when he and I were left alone together, he sat with an air uponhim of general lying by in consequence of information he possessed,that really was too much for me.  He cross-examined his very winewhen he had nothing else in hand.  He held it between himself andthe candle, tasted the port, rolled it in his mouth, swallowed it,looked at his glass again, smelt the port, tried it, drank it,filled again, and cross-examined the glass again, until I was asnervous as if I had known the wine to be telling him something tomy disadvantage.  Three or four times I feebly thought I would startconversation; but whenever he saw me going to ask him anything, helooked at me with his glass in his hand, and rolling his wine aboutin his mouth, as if requesting me to take notice that it was of nouse, for he couldn't answer.

I think Miss Pocket was conscious that the sight of me involved herin the danger of being goaded to madness, and perhaps tearing offher cap,--which was a very hideous one, in the nature of a muslinmop,--and strewing the ground with her hair,--which assuredly hadnever grown on her head.  She did not appear when we afterwards wentup to Miss Havisham's room, and we four played at whist.  In theinterval, Miss Havisham, in a fantastic way, had put some of themost beautiful jewels from her dressing-table into Estella's hair,and about her bosom and arms; and I saw even my guardian look ather from under his thick eyebrows, and raise them a little, whenher loveliness was before him, with those rich flushes of glitterand color in it.

Of the manner and extent to which he took our trumps into custody,and came out with mean little cards at the ends of hands, beforewhich the glory of our Kings and Queens was utterly abased, I saynothing; nor, of the feeling that I had, respecting his lookingupon us personally in the light of three very obvious and poorriddles that he had found out long ago.  What I suffered from, wasthe incompatibility between his cold presence and my feelingstowards Estella.  It was not that I knew I could never bear to speakto him about her, that I knew I could never bear to hear him creakhis boots at her, that I knew I could never bear to see him washhis hands of her; it was, that my admiration should be within afoot or two of him,--it was, that my feelings should be in the sameplace with him,--that, was the agonizing circumstance.

We played until nine o'clock, and then it was arranged that whenEstella came to London I should be forewarned of her coming andshould meet her at the coach; and then I took leave of her, andtouched her and left her.

My guardian lay at the Boar in the next room to mine.  Far into thenight, Miss Havisham's words, "Love her, love her, love her!"sounded in my ears.  I adapted them for my own repetition, and saidto my pillow, "I love her, I love her, I love her!" hundreds oftimes.  Then, a burst of gratitude came upon me, that she should bedestined for me, once the blacksmith's boy.  Then I thought if shewere, as I feared, by no means rapturously grateful for thatdestiny yet, when would she begin to be interested in me?  Whenshould I awaken the heart within her that was mute and sleepingnow?

Ah me!  I thought those were high and great emotions.  But I neverthought there was anything low and small in my keeping away fromJoe, because I knew she would be contemptuous of him.  It was but aday gone, and Joe had brought the tears into my eyes; they had soondried, God forgive me! soon dried.

Chapter XXX

After well considering the matter while I was dressing at the BlueBoar in the morning, I resolved to tell my guardian that I doubtedOrlick's being the right sort of man to fill a post of trust atMiss Havisham's.  "Why of course he is not the right sort of man,Pip," said my guardian, comfortably satisfied beforehand on thegeneral head, "because the man who fills the post of trust never isthe right sort of man."  It seemed quite to put him into spirits tofind that this particular post was not exceptionally held by theright sort of man, and he listened in a satisfied manner while Itold him what knowledge I had of Orlick.  "Very good, Pip," heobserved, when I had concluded, "I'll go round presently, and payour friend off."  Rather alarmed by this summary action, I was for alittle delay, and even hinted that our friend himself might bedifficult to deal with.  "Oh no he won't," said my guardian, makinghis pocket-handkerchief-point, with perfect confidence; "I shouldlike to see him argue the question with me."

As we were going back together to London by the midday coach, andas I breakfasted under such terrors of Pumblechook that I couldscarcely hold my cup, this gave me an opportunity of saying that Iwanted a walk, and that I would go on along the London road whileMr. Jaggers was occupied, if he would let the coachman know that Iwould get into my place when overtaken.  I was thus enabled to flyfrom the Blue Boar immediately after breakfast.  By then making aloop of about a couple of miles into the open country at the backof Pumblechook's premises, I got round into the High Street again,a little beyond that pitfall, and felt myself in comparativesecurity.

It was interesting to be in the quiet old town once more, and itwas not disagreeable to be here and there suddenly recognized andstared after.  One or two of the tradespeople even darted out oftheir shops and went a little way down the street before me, thatthey might turn, as if they had forgotten something, and pass meface to face,--on which occasions I don't know whether they or Imade the worse pretence; they of not doing it, or I of not seeingit.  Still my position was a distinguished one, and I was not at alldissatisfied with it, until Fate threw me in the way of thatunlimited miscreant, Trabb's boy.

Casting my eyes along the street at a certain point of my progress,I beheld Trabb's boy approaching, lashing himself with an emptyblue bag.  Deeming that a serene and unconscious contemplation ofhim would best beseem me, and would be most likely to quell hisevil mind, I advanced with that expression of countenance, and wasrather congratulating myself on my success, when suddenly the kneesof Trabb's boy smote together, his hair uprose, his cap fell off,he trembled violently in every limb, staggered out into the road,and crying to the populace, "Hold me!  I'm so frightened!" feigned tobe in a paroxysm of terror and contrition, occasioned by thedignity of my appearance.  As I passed him, his teeth loudlychattered in his head, and with every mark of extreme humiliation,he prostrated himself in the dust.

This was a hard thing to bear, but this was nothing.  I had notadvanced another two hundred yards when, to my inexpressibleterror, amazement, and indignation, I again beheld Trabb's boyapproaching.  He was coming round a narrow corner.  His blue bag wasslung over his shoulder, honest industry beamed in his eyes, adetermination to proceed to Trabb's with cheerful briskness wasindicated in his gait.  With a shock he became aware of me, and wasseverely visited as before; but this time his motion was rotatory,and he staggered round and round me with knees more afflicted, andwith uplifted hands as if beseeching for mercy.  His sufferings werehailed with the greatest joy by a knot of spectators, and I feltutterly confounded.

I had not got as much further down the street as the post-office,when I again beheld Trabb's boy shooting round by a back way.  Thistime, he was entirely changed.  He wore the blue bag in the mannerof my great-coat, and was strutting along the pavement towards meon the opposite side of the street, attended by a company ofdelighted young friends to whom he from time to time exclaimed,with a wave of his hand, "Don't know yah!"  Words cannot state theamount of aggravation and injury wreaked upon me by Trabb's boy,when passing abreast of me, he pulled up his shirt-collar, twinedhis side-hair, stuck an arm akimbo, and smirked extravagantly by,wriggling his elbows and body, and drawling to his attendants,"Don't know yah, don't know yah, 'pon my soul don't know yah!"  Thedisgrace attendant on his immediately afterwards taking to crowingand pursuing me across the bridge with crows, as from anexceedingly dejected fowl who had known me when I was a blacksmith,culminated the disgrace with which I left the town, and was, so tospeak, ejected by it into the open country.

But unless I had taken the life of Trabb's boy on that occasion, Ireally do not even now see what I could have done save endure.  Tohave struggled with him in the street, or to have exacted any lowerrecompense from him than his heart's best blood, would have beenfutile and degrading.  Moreover, he was a boy whom no man couldhurt; an invulnerable and dodging serpent who, when chased into acorner, flew out again between his captor's legs, scornfullyyelping.  I wrote, however, to Mr. Trabb by next day's post, to saythat Mr. Pip must decline to deal further with one who could so farforget what he owed to the best interests of society, as to employa boy who excited Loathing in every respectable mind.

The coach, with Mr. Jaggers inside, came up in due time, and I tookmy box-seat again, and arrived in London safe,--but not sound, formy heart was gone.  As soon as I arrived, I sent a penitentialcodfish and barrel of oysters to Joe (as reparation for not havinggone myself), and then went on to Barnard's Inn.

I found Herbert dining on cold meat, and delighted to welcome meback.  Having despatched The Avenger to the coffee-house for anaddition to the dinner, I felt that I must open my breast that veryevening to my friend and chum.  As confidence was out of thequestion with The Avenger in the hall, which could merely beregarded in the light of an antechamber to the keyhole, I sent himto the Play.  A better proof of the severity of my bondage to thattaskmaster could scarcely be afforded, than the degrading shifts towhich I was constantly driven to find him employment.  So mean isextremity, that I sometimes sent him to Hyde Park corner to seewhat o'clock it was.

Dinner done and we sitting with our feet upon the fender, I said toHerbert, "My dear Herbert, I have something very particular to tellyou."

"My dear Handel," he returned, "I shall esteem and respect yourconfidence."

"It concerns myself, Herbert," said I, "and one other person."

Herbert crossed his feet, looked at the fire with his head on oneside, and having looked at it in vain for some time, looked at mebecause I didn't go on.

"Herbert," said I, laying my hand upon his knee, "I love--I adore--Estella."

Instead of being transfixed, Herbert replied in an easymatter-ofcourse way, "Exactly.  Well?"

"Well, Herbert?  Is that all you say?  Well?"

"What next, I mean?" said Herbert.  "Of course I know that."

"How do you know it?" said I.

"How do I know it, Handel?  Why, from you."

"I never told you."

"Told me!  You have never told me when you have got your hair cut,but I have had senses to perceive it.  You have always adored her,ever since I have known you.  You brought your adoration and yourportmanteau here together.  Told me!  Why, you have always told meall day long.  When you told me your own story, you told me plainlythat you began adoring her the first time you saw her, when youwere very young indeed."

"Very well, then," said I, to whom this was a new and not unwelcomelight, "I have never left off adoring her.  And she has come back, amost beautiful and most elegant creature.  And I saw her yesterday.And if I adored her before, I now doubly adore her."

"Lucky for you then, Handel," said Herbert, "that you are pickedout for her and allotted to her.  Without encroaching on forbiddenground, we may venture to say that there can be no doubt betweenourselves of that fact.  Have you any idea yet, of Estella's viewson the adoration question?"

I shook my head gloomily.  "Oh!  She is thousands of miles away, fromme," said I.

"Patience, my dear Handel:  time enough, time enough.  But you havesomething more to say?"

"I am ashamed to say it," I returned, "and yet it's no worse to sayit than to think it.  You call me a lucky fellow.  Of course, I am.  Iwas a blacksmith's boy but yesterday; I am--what shall I say I am--to-day?"

"Say a good fellow, if you want a phrase," returned Herbert,smiling, and clapping his hand on the back of mine--"a good fellow,with impetuosity and hesitation, boldness and diffidence, actionand dreaming, curiously mixed in him."

I stopped for a moment to consider whether there really was thismixture in my character.  On the whole, I by no means recognized theanalysis, but thought it not worth disputing.

"When I ask what I am to call myself to-day, Herbert," I went on,"I suggest what I have in my thoughts.  You say I am lucky.  I know Ihave done nothing to raise myself in life, and that Fortune alonehas raised me; that is being very lucky.  And yet, when I think ofEstella--"

("And when don't you, you know?" Herbert threw in, with his eyes onthe fire; which I thought kind and sympathetic of him.)

"--Then, my dear Herbert, I cannot tell you how dependent anduncertain I feel, and how exposed to hundreds of chances.  Avoidingforbidden ground, as you did just now, I may still say that on theconstancy of one person (naming no person) all my expectationsdepend.  And at the best, how indefinite and unsatisfactory, only toknow so vaguely what they are!"  In saying this, I relieved my mindof what had always been there, more or less, though no doubt mostsince yesterday.

"Now, Handel," Herbert replied, in his gay, hopeful way, "it seemsto me that in the despondency of the tender passion, we are lookinginto our gift-horse's mouth with a magnifying-glass.  Likewise, itseems to me that, concentrating our attention on the examination,we altogether overlook one of the best points of the animal.  Didn'tyou tell me that your guardian, Mr. Jaggers, told you in thebeginning, that you were not endowed with expectations only?  Andeven if he had not told you so,--though that is a very large If, Igrant,--could you believe that of all men in London, Mr. Jaggers isthe man to hold his present relations towards you unless he weresure of his ground?"

I said I could not deny that this was a strong point.  I said it(people often do so, in such cases) like a rather reluctantconcession to truth and justice;--as if I wanted to deny it!

"I should think it was a strong point," said Herbert, "and I shouldthink you would be puzzled to imagine a stronger; as to the rest,you must bide your guardian's time, and he must bide his client'stime.  You'll be one-and-twenty before you know where you are, andthen perhaps you'll get some further enlightenment.  At all events,you'll be nearer getting it, for it must come at last."

"What a hopeful disposition you have!" said I, gratefully admiringhis cheery ways.

"I ought to have," said Herbert, "for I have not much else.  I mustacknowledge, by the by, that the good sense of what I have justsaid is not my own, but my father's.  The only remark I ever heardhim make on your story, was the final one, "The thing is settledand done, or Mr. Jaggers would not be in it."  And now before I sayanything more about my father, or my father's son, and repayconfidence with confidence, I want to make myself seriouslydisagreeable to you for a moment,--positively repulsive."

"You won't succeed," said I.

"O yes I shall!" said he.  "One, two, three, and now I am in forit.  Handel, my good fellow;"--though he spoke in this light tone, hewas very much in earnest,--"I have been thinking since we have beentalking with our feet on this fender, that Estella surely cannot bea condition of your inheritance, if she was never referred to byyour guardian.  Am I right in so understanding what you have toldme, as that he never referred to her, directly or indirectly, inany way?  Never even hinted, for instance, that your patron mighthave views as to your marriage ultimately?"

"Never."

"Now, Handel, I am quite free from the flavor of sour grapes, uponmy soul and honor!  Not being bound to her, can you not detachyourself from her?--I told you I should be disagreeable."

I turned my head aside, for, with a rush and a sweep, like the oldmarsh winds coming up from the sea, a feeling like that which hadsubdued me on the morning when I left the forge, when the mistswere solemnly rising, and when I laid my hand upon the villagefinger-post, smote upon my heart again.  There was silence betweenus for a little while.

"Yes; but my dear Handel," Herbert went on, as if we had beentalking, instead of silent, "its having been so strongly rooted inthe breast of a boy whom nature and circumstances made so romantic,renders it very serious.  Think of her bringing-up, and think ofMiss Havisham.  Think of what she is herself (now I am repulsive andyou abominate me).  This may lead to miserable things."

"I know it, Herbert," said I, with my head still turned away, "butI can't help it."

"You can't detach yourself?"

"No.  Impossible!"

"You can't try, Handel?"

"No.  Impossible!"

"Well!" said Herbert, getting up with a lively shake as if he hadbeen asleep, and stirring the fire, "now I'll endeavor to makemyself agreeable again!"

So he went round the room and shook the curtains out, put thechairs in their places, tidied the books and so forth that werelying about, looked into the hall, peeped into the letter-box, shutthe door, and came back to his chair by the fire:  where he satdown, nursing his left leg in both arms.

"I was going to say a word or two, Handel, concerning my father andmy father's son.  I am afraid it is scarcely necessary for myfather's son to remark that my father's establishment is notparticularly brilliant in its housekeeping."

"There is always plenty, Herbert," said I, to say somethingencouraging.

"O yes! and so the dustman says, I believe, with the strongestapproval, and so does the marine-store shop in the back street.Gravely, Handel, for the subject is grave enough, you know how itis as well as I do.  I suppose there was a time once when my fatherhad not given matters up; but if ever there was, the time is gone.May I ask you if you have ever had an opportunity of remarking,down in your part of the country, that the children of not exactlysuitable marriages are always most particularly anxious to bemarried?"

This was such a singular question, that I asked him in return, "Isit so?"

"I don't know," said Herbert, "that's what I want to know.  Becauseit is decidedly the case with us.  My poor sister Charlotte, who wasnext me and died before she was fourteen, was a striking example.Little Jane is the same.  In her desire to be matrimoniallyestablished, you might suppose her to have passed her shortexistence in the perpetual contemplation of domestic bliss.  LittleAlick in a frock has already made arrangements for his union with asuitable young person at Kew.  And indeed, I think we are allengaged, except the baby."

"Then you are?" said I.

"I am," said Herbert; "but it's a secret."

I assured him of my keeping the secret, and begged to be favoredwith further particulars.  He had spoken so sensibly and feelinglyof my weakness that I wanted to know something about his strength.

"May I ask the name?" I said.

"Name of Clara," said Herbert.

"Live in London?"

"Yes.  perhaps I ought to mention," said Herbert, who had becomecuriously crestfallen and meek, since we entered on the interestingtheme, "that she is rather below my mother's nonsensical familynotions.  Her father had to do with the victualling ofpassenger-ships.  I think he was a species of purser."

"What is he now?" said I.

"He's an invalid now," replied Herbert.

"Living on--?"

"On the first floor," said Herbert.  Which was not at all what Imeant, for I had intended my question to apply to his means.  "Ihave never seen him, for he has always kept his room overhead,since I have known Clara.  But I have heard him constantly.  He makestremendous rows,--roars, and pegs at the floor with some frightfulinstrument."  In looking at me and then laughing heartily, Herbertfor the time recovered his usual lively manner.

"Don't you expect to see him?" said I.

"O yes, I constantly expect to see him," returned Herbert,"because I never hear him, without expecting him to come tumblingthrough the ceiling.  But I don't know how long the rafters mayhold."

When he had once more laughed heartily, he became meek again, andtold me that the moment he began to realize Capital, it was hisintention to marry this young lady.  He added as a self-evidentproposition, engendering low spirits, "But you can't marry, youknow, while you're looking about you."

As we contemplated the fire, and as I thought what a difficultvision to realize this same Capital sometimes was, I put my handsin my pockets.  A folded piece of paper in one of them attracting myattention, I opened it and found it to be the play-bill I hadreceived from Joe, relative to the celebrated provincial amateur ofRoscian renown.  "And bless my heart," I involuntarily added aloud,"it's to-night!"

This changed the subject in an instant, and made us hurriedlyresolve to go to the play.  So, when I had pledged myself to comfortand abet Herbert in the affair of his heart by all practicable andimpracticable means, and when Herbert had told me that hisaffianced already knew me by reputation and that I should bepresented to her, and when we had warmly shaken hands upon ourmutual confidence, we blew out our candles, made up our fire,locked our door, and issued forth in quest of Mr. Wopsle andDenmark.

Chapter XXXI

On our arrival in Denmark, we found the king and queen of thatcountry elevated in two arm-chairs on a kitchen-table, holding aCourt.  The whole of the Danish nobility were in attendance;consisting of a noble boy in the wash-leather boots of a giganticancestor, a venerable Peer with a dirty face who seemed to haverisen from the people late in life, and the Danish chivalry with acomb in its hair and a pair of white silk legs, and presenting onthe whole a feminine appearance.  My gifted townsman stood gloomilyapart, with folded arms, and I could have wished that his curls andforehead had been more probable.

Several curious little circumstances transpired as the actionproceeded.  The late king of the country not only appeared to havebeen troubled with a cough at the time of his decease, but to havetaken it with him to the tomb, and to have brought it back.  Theroyal phantom also carried a ghostly manuscript round itstruncheon, to which it had the appearance of occasionallyreferring, and that too, with an air of anxiety and a tendency tolose the place of reference which were suggestive of a state ofmortality.  It was this, I conceive, which led to the Shade's beingadvised by the gallery to "turn over!"--a recommendation which ittook extremely ill.  It was likewise to be noted of this majesticspirit, that whereas it always appeared with an air of having beenout a long time and walked an immense distance, it perceptibly camefrom a closely contiguous wall.  This occasioned its terrors to bereceived derisively.  The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady,though no doubt historically brazen, was considered by the publicto have too much brass about her; her chin being attached to herdiadem by a broad band of that metal (as if she had a gorgeoustoothache), her waist being encircled by another, and each of herarms by another, so that she was openly mentioned as "thekettle-drum."  The noble boy in the ancestral boots wasinconsistent, representing himself, as it were in one breath, as anable seaman, a strolling actor, a grave-digger, a clergyman, and aperson of the utmost importance at a Court fencing-match, on theauthority of whose practised eye and nice discrimination the fineststrokes were judged.  This gradually led to a want of toleration forhim, and even--on his being detected in holy orders, and decliningto perform the funeral service--to the general indignation takingthe form of nuts.  Lastly, Ophelia was a prey to such slow musicalmadness, that when, in course of time, she had taken off her whitemuslin scarf, folded it up, and buried it, a sulky man who had beenlong cooling his impatient nose against an iron bar in the frontrow of the gallery, growled, "Now the baby's put to bed let's havesupper!"  Which, to say the least of it, was out of keeping.

Upon my unfortunate townsman all these incidents accumulated withplayful effect.  Whenever that undecided Prince had to ask aquestion or state a doubt, the public helped him out with it.  Asfor example; on the question whether 'twas nobler in the mind tosuffer, some roared yes, and some no, and some inclining to bothopinions said "Toss up for it;" and quite a Debating Society arose.When he asked what should such fellows as he do crawling betweenearth and heaven, he was encouraged with loud cries of "Hear,hear!"  When he appeared with his stocking disordered (its disorderexpressed, according to usage, by one very neat fold in the top,which I suppose to be always got up with a flat iron), aconversation took place in the gallery respecting the paleness ofhis leg, and whether it was occasioned by the turn the ghost hadgiven him.  On his taking the recorders,--very like a little blackflute that had just been played in the orchestra and handed out atthe door,--he was called upon unanimously for Rule Britannia.  Whenhe recommended the player not to saw the air thus, the sulky mansaid, "And don't you do it, neither; you're a deal worse than him!"And I grieve to add that peals of laughter greeted Mr. Wopsle onevery one of these occasions.

But his greatest trials were in the churchyard, which had theappearance of a primeval forest, with a kind of smallecclesiastical wash-house on one side, and a turnpike gate on theother.  Mr. Wopsle in a comprehensive black cloak, being descriedentering at the turnpike, the gravedigger was admonished in afriendly way, "Look out!  Here's the undertaker a coming, to see howyou're a getting on with your work!"  I believe it is well known ina constitutional country that Mr. Wopsle could not possibly havereturned the skull, after moralizing over it, without dusting hisfingers on a white napkin taken from his breast; but even thatinnocent and indispensable action did not pass without the comment,"Wai-ter!"  The arrival of the body for interment (in an empty blackbox with the lid tumbling open), was the signal for a general joy,which was much enhanced by the discovery, among the bearers, of anindividual obnoxious to identification.  The joy attended Mr. Wopslethrough his struggle with Laertes on the brink of the orchestra andthe grave, and slackened no more until he had tumbled the king offthe kitchen-table, and had died by inches from the ankles upward.

We had made some pale efforts in the beginning to applaud Mr.Wopsle; but they were too hopeless to be persisted in.  Therefore wehad sat, feeling keenly for him, but laughing, nevertheless, fromear to ear.  I laughed in spite of myself all the time, the wholething was so droll; and yet I had a latent impression that therewas something decidedly fine in Mr. Wopsle's elocution,--not for oldassociations' sake, I am afraid, but because it was very slow, verydreary, very up-hill and down-hill, and very unlike any way inwhich any man in any natural circumstances of life or death everexpressed himself about anything.  When the tragedy was over, and hehad been called for and hooted, I said to Herbert, "Let us go atonce, or perhaps we shall meet him."

We made all the haste we could down stairs, but we were not quickenough either.  Standing at the door was a Jewish man with anunnatural heavy smear of eyebrow, who caught my eyes as weadvanced, and said, when we came up with him,--

"Mr. Pip and friend?"

Identity of Mr. Pip and friend confessed.

"Mr. Waldengarver," said the man, "would be glad to have thehonor."

"Waldengarver?" I repeated--when Herbert murmured in my ear,"Probably Wopsle."

"Oh!" said I.  "Yes.  Shall we follow you?"

"A few steps, please."  When we were in a side alley, he turned andasked, "How did you think he looked?--I dressed him."

I don't know what he had looked like, except a funeral; with theaddition of a large Danish sun or star hanging round his neck by ablue ribbon, that had given him the appearance of being insured insome extraordinary Fire Office.  But I said he had looked very nice.

"When he come to the grave," said our conductor, "he showed hiscloak beautiful.  But, judging from the wing, it looked to me thatwhen he see the ghost in the queen's apartment, he might have mademore of his stockings."

I modestly assented, and we all fell through a little dirty swingdoor, into a sort of hot packing-case immediately behind it.  HereMr. Wopsle was divesting himself of his Danish garments, and herethere was just room for us to look at him over one another'sshoulders, by keeping the packing-case door, or lid, wide open.

"Gentlemen," said Mr. Wopsle, "I am proud to see you.  I hope, Mr.Pip, you will excuse my sending round.  I had the happiness to knowyou in former times, and the Drama has ever had a claim which hasever been acknowledged, on the noble and the affluent."

Meanwhile, Mr. Waldengarver, in a frightful perspiration, was tryingto get himself out of his princely sables.

"Skin the stockings off Mr. Waldengarver," said the owner of thatproperty, "or you'll bust 'em.  Bust 'em, and you'll bustfive-and-thirty shillings.  Shakspeare never was complimented with afiner pair.  Keep quiet in your chair now, and leave 'em to me."

With that, he went upon his knees, and began to flay his victim;who, on the first stocking coming off, would certainly have fallenover backward with his chair, but for there being no room to fallanyhow.

I had been afraid until then to say a word about the play.  Butthen, Mr. Waldengarver looked up at us complacently, and said,--

"Gentlemen, how did it seem to you, to go, in front?"

Herbert said from behind (at the same time poking me), "Capitally."So I said "Capitally."

"How did you like my reading of the character, gentlemen?" said Mr.Waldengarver, almost, if not quite, with patronage.

Herbert said from behind (again poking me), "Massive and concrete."So I said boldly, as if I had originated it, and must beg to insistupon it, "Massive and concrete."

"I am glad to have your approbation, gentlemen," said Mr.Waldengarver, with an air of dignity, in spite of his being groundagainst the wall at the time, and holding on by the seat of thechair.

"But I'll tell you one thing, Mr. Waldengarver," said the man whowas on his knees, "in which you're out in your reading.  Now mind!  Idon't care who says contrairy; I tell you so.  You're out in yourreading of Hamlet when you get your legs in profile.  The lastHamlet as I dressed, made the same mistakes in his reading atrehearsal, till I got him to put a large red wafer on each of hisshins, and then at that rehearsal (which was the last) I went infront, sir, to the back of the pit, and whenever his readingbrought him into profile, I called out "I don't see no wafers!"  Andat night his reading was lovely."

Mr. Waldengarver smiled at me, as much as to say "a faithfulDependent--I overlook his folly;" and then said aloud, "My view isa little classic and thoughtful for them here; but they willimprove, they will improve."

Herbert and I said together, O, no doubt they would improve.

"Did you observe, gentlemen," said Mr. Waldengarver, "that there wasa man in the gallery who endeavored to cast derision on theservice,--I mean, the representation?"

We basely replied that we rather thought we had noticed such a man.I added, "He was drunk, no doubt."

"O dear no, sir," said Mr. Wopsle, "not drunk.  His employer wouldsee to that, sir.  His employer would not allow him to be drunk."

"You know his employer?" said I.

Mr. Wopsle shut his eyes, and opened them again; performing bothceremonies very slowly.  "You must have observed, gentlemen," saidhe, "an ignorant and a blatant ass, with a rasping throat and acountenance expressive of low malignity, who went through--I willnot say sustained--the rle (if I may use a French expression) ofClaudius, King of Denmark.  That is his employer, gentlemen.  Such isthe profession!"

Without distinctly knowing whether I should have been more sorryfor Mr. Wopsle if he had been in despair, I was so sorry for him asit was, that I took the opportunity of his turning round to havehis braces put on,--which jostled us out at the doorway,--to askHerbert what he thought of having him home to supper?  Herbert saidhe thought it would be kind to do so; therefore I invited him, andhe went to Barnard's with us, wrapped up to the eyes, and we didour best for him, and he sat until two o'clock in the morning,reviewing his success and developing his plans.  I forget in detailwhat they were, but I have a general recollection that he was tobegin with reviving the Drama, and to end with crushing it;inasmuch as his decease would leave it utterly bereft and without achance or hope.

Miserably I went to bed after all, and miserably thought ofEstella, and miserably dreamed that my expectations were allcancelled, and that I had to give my hand in marriage to Herbert'sClara, or play Hamlet to Miss Havisham's Ghost, before twentythousand people, without knowing twenty words of it.

Chapter XXXII

One day when I was busy with my books and Mr. Pocket, I received anote by the post, the mere outside of which threw me into a greatflutter; for, though I had never seen the handwriting in which itwas addressed, I divined whose hand it was.  It had no setbeginning, as Dear Mr. Pip, or Dear Pip, or Dear Sir, or DearAnything, but ran thus:--

"I am to come to London the day after to-morrow by the middaycoach.  I believe it was settled you should meet me?  At all eventsMiss Havisham has that impression, and I write in obedience to it.She sends you her regard.

Yours, ESTELLA."

If there had been time, I should probably have ordered severalsuits of clothes for this occasion; but as there was not, I wasfain to be content with those I had.  My appetite vanishedinstantly, and I knew no peace or rest until the day arrived.  Notthat its arrival brought me either; for, then I was worse than ever,and began haunting the coach-office in Wood Street, Cheapside,before the coach had left the Blue Boar in our town.  For all that Iknew this perfectly well, I still felt as if it were not safe tolet the coach-office be out of my sight longer than five minutes ata time; and in this condition of unreason I had performed the firsthalf-hour of a watch of four or five hours, when Wemmick ranagainst me.

"Halloa, Mr. Pip," said he; "how do you do?  I should hardly havethought this was your beat."

I explained that I was waiting to meet somebody who was coming upby coach, and I inquired after the Castle and the Aged.

"Both flourishing thankye," said Wemmick, "and particularly theAged.  He's in wonderful feather.  He'll be eighty-two next birthday.I have a notion of firing eighty-two times, if the neighborhoodshouldn't complain, and that cannon of mine should prove equal tothe pressure.  However, this is not London talk.  Where do you thinkI am going to?"

"To the office?" said I, for he was tending in that direction.

"Next thing to it," returned Wemmick, "I am going to Newgate.  Weare in a banker's-parcel case just at present, and I have been downthe road taking a squint at the scene of action, and thereuponmust have a word or two with our client."

"Did your client commit the robbery?" I asked.

"Bless your soul and body, no," answered Wemmick, very drily.  "Buthe is accused of it.  So might you or I be.  Either of us might beaccused of it, you know."

"Only neither of us is," I remarked.

"Yah!" said Wemmick, touching me on the breast with his forefinger;"you're a deep one, Mr. Pip!  Would you like to have a look atNewgate?  Have you time to spare?"

I had so much time to spare, that the proposal came as a relief,notwithstanding its irreconcilability with my latent desire to keepmy eye on the coach-office.  Muttering that I would make the inquirywhether I had time to walk with him, I went into the office, andascertained from the clerk with the nicest precision and much tothe trying of his temper, the earliest moment at which the coachcould be expected,--which I knew beforehand, quite as well as he.  Ithen rejoined Mr. Wemmick, and affecting to consult my watch, and tobe surprised by the information I had received, accepted his offer.

We were at Newgate in a few minutes, and we passed through thelodge where some fetters were hanging up on the bare walls amongthe prison rules, into the interior of the jail.  At that timejails were much neglected, and the period of exaggerated reactionconsequent on all public wrongdoing--and which is always itsheaviest and longest punishment--was still far off.  So felonswere not lodged and fed better than soldiers, (to say nothing ofpaupers,) and seldom set fire to their prisons with the excusableobject of improving the flavor of their soup.  It was visiting timewhen Wemmick took me in, and a potman was going his rounds withbeer; and the prisoners, behind bars in yards, were buying beer,and talking to friends; and a frowzy, ugly, disorderly, depressingscene it was.

It struck me that Wemmick walked among the prisoners much as agardener might walk among his plants.  This was first put into myhead by his seeing a shoot that had come up in the night, andsaying, "What, Captain Tom?  Are you there?  Ah, indeed!" and also,"Is that Black Bill behind the cistern?  Why I didn't look for youthese two months; how do you find yourself?"  Equally in hisstopping at the bars and attending to anxious whisperers,--alwayssingly,--Wemmick with his post-office in an immovable state, lookedat them while in conference, as if he were taking particular noticeof the advance they had made, since last observed, towards comingout in full blow at their trial.

He was highly popular, and I found that he took the familiardepartment of Mr. Jaggers's business; though something of the stateof Mr. Jaggers hung about him too, forbidding approach beyondcertain limits.  His personal recognition of each successive clientwas comprised in a nod, and in his settling his hat a little easieron his head with both hands, and then tightening the post-office,and putting his hands in his pockets.  In one or two instancesthere was a difficulty respecting the raising of fees, and then Mr.Wemmick, backing as far as possible from the insufficient moneyproduced, said, "it's no use, my boy.  I'm only a subordinate.  Ican't take it.  Don't go on in that way with a subordinate.  If youare unable to make up your quantum, my boy, you had better addressyourself to a principal; there are plenty of principals in theprofession, you know, and what is not worth the while of one, maybe worth the while of another; that's my recommendation to you,speaking as a subordinate.  Don't try on useless measures.  Whyshould you?  Now, who's next?"

Thus, we walked through Wemmick's greenhouse, until he turned to meand said, "Notice the man I shall shake hands with."  I should havedone so, without the preparation, as he had shaken hands with noone yet.

Almost as soon as he had spoken, a portly upright man (whom I cansee now, as I write) in a well-worn olive-colored frock-coat, witha peculiar pallor overspreading the red in his complexion, andeyes that went wandering about when he tried to fix them, came upto a corner of the bars, and put his hand to his hat--which had agreasy and fatty surface like cold broth--with a half-serious andhalf-jocose military salute.

"Colonel, to you!" said Wemmick; "how are you, Colonel?"

"All right, Mr. Wemmick."

"Everything was done that could be done, but the evidence was toostrong for us, Colonel."

"Yes, it was too strong, sir,--but I don't care."

"No, no," said Wemmick, coolly, "you don't care."  Then, turning tome, "Served His Majesty this man.  Was a soldier in the line andbought his discharge."

I said, "Indeed?" and the man's eyes looked at me, and then lookedover my head, and then looked all round me, and then he drew hishand across his lips and laughed.

"I think I shall be out of this on Monday, sir," he said toWemmick.

"Perhaps," returned my friend, "but there's no knowing."

"I am glad to have the chance of bidding you good by, Mr. Wemmick,"said the man, stretching out his hand between two bars.

"Thankye," said Wemmick, shaking hands with him.  "Same to you,Colonel."

"If what I had upon me when taken had been real, Mr. Wemmick," saidthe man, unwilling to let his hand go, "I should have asked thefavor of your wearing another ring--in acknowledgment of yourattentions."

"I'll accept the will for the deed," said Wemmick.  "By the by; youwere quite a pigeon-fancier."  The man looked up at the sky.  "I amtold you had a remarkable breed of tumblers.  Could you commissionany friend of yours to bring me a pair, of you've no further usefor 'em?"

"It shall be done, sir?"

"All right," said Wemmick, "they shall be taken care of.  Goodafternoon, Colonel.  Good by!"  They shook hands again, and as wewalked away Wemmick said to me, "A Coiner, a very good workman.  TheRecorder's report is made to-day, and he is sure to be executed onMonday.  Still you see, as far as it goes, a pair of pigeons areportable property all the same."  With that, he looked back, andnodded at this dead plant, and then cast his eyes about him inwalking out of the yard, as if he were considering what other potwould go best in its place.

As we came out of the prison through the lodge, I found that thegreat importance of my guardian was appreciated by the turnkeys, noless than by those whom they held in charge.  "Well, Mr. Wemmick,"said the turnkey, who kept us between the two studded and spikedlodge gates, and who carefully locked one before he unlocked theother, "what's Mr. Jaggers going to do with that water-side murder?Is he going to make it manslaughter, or what's he going to make ofit?"

"Why don't you ask him?" returned Wemmick.

"O yes, I dare say!" said the turnkey.

"Now, that's the way with them here, Mr. Pip," remarked Wemmick,turning to me with his post-office elongated.  "They don't mind whatthey ask of me, the subordinate; but you'll never catch 'em askingany questions of my principal."

"Is this young gentleman one of the 'prentices or articled ones ofyour office?" asked the turnkey, with a grin at Mr. Wemmick'shumor.

"There he goes again, you see!" cried Wemmick, "I told you so!  Asksanother question of the subordinate before his first is dry!  Well,supposing Mr. Pip is one of them?"

"Why then," said the turnkey, grinning again, "he knows what Mr.Jaggers is."

"Yah!" cried Wemmick, suddenly hitting out at the turnkey in afacetious way, "you're dumb as one of your own keys when you haveto do with my principal, you know you are.  Let us out, you old fox,or I'll get him to bring an action against you for falseimprisonment."

The turnkey laughed, and gave us good day, and stood laughing at usover the spikes of the wicket when we descended the steps into thestreet.

"Mind you, Mr. Pip," said Wemmick, gravely in my ear, as he took myarm to be more confidential; "I don't know that Mr. Jaggers does abetter thing than the way in which he keeps himself so high.  He'salways so high.  His constant height is of a piece with his immenseabilities.  That Colonel durst no more take leave of him, than thatturnkey durst ask him his intentions respecting a case.  Then,between his height and them, he slips in his subordinate,--don'tyou see?--and so he has 'em, soul and body."

I was very much impressed, and not for the first time, by myguardian's subtlety.  To confess the truth, I very heartily wished,and not for the first time, that I had had some other guardian ofminor abilities.

Mr. Wemmick and I parted at the office in Little Britain, wheresuppliants for Mr. Jaggers's notice were lingering about as usual,and I returned to my watch in the street of the coach-office, withsome three hours on hand.  I consumed the whole time in thinking howstrange it was that I should be encompassed by all this taint ofprison and crime; that, in my childhood out on our lonely marsheson a winter evening, I should have first encountered it; that, itshould have reappeared on two occasions, starting out like a stainthat was faded but not gone; that, it should in this new waypervade my fortune and advancement.  While my mind was thus engaged,I thought of the beautiful young Estella, proud and refined, comingtowards me, and I thought with absolute abhorrence of the contrastbetween the jail and her.  I wished that Wemmick had not met me, orthat I had not yielded to him and gone with him, so that, of alldays in the year on this day, I might not have had Newgate in mybreath and on my clothes.  I beat the prison dust off my feet as Isauntered to and fro, and I shook it out of my dress, and I exhaledits air from my lungs.  So contaminated did I feel, remembering whowas coming, that the coach came quickly after all, and I was notyet free from the soiling consciousness of Mr. Wemmick'sconservatory, when I saw her face at the coach window and her handwaving to me.

What was the nameless shadow which again in that one instant hadpassed?

Chapter XXXIII

In her furred travelling-dress, Estella seemed more delicatelybeautiful than she had ever seemed yet, even in my eyes.  Her mannerwas more winning than she had cared to let it be to me before, andI thought I saw Miss Havisham's influence in the change.

We stood in the Inn Yard while she pointed out her luggage to me,and when it was all collected I remembered--having forgotteneverything but herself in the meanwhile--that I knew nothing ofher destination.

"I am going to Richmond," she told me.  "Our lesson is, that thereare two Richmonds, one in Surrey and one in Yorkshire, and that mineis the Surrey Richmond.  The distance is ten miles.  I am to have acarriage, and you are to take me.  This is my purse, and you are topay my charges out of it.  O, you must take the purse!  We have nochoice, you and I, but to obey our instructions.  We are not free tofollow our own devices, you and I."

As she looked at me in giving me the purse, I hoped there was aninner meaning in her words.  She said them slightingly, but not withdispleasure.

"A carriage will have to be sent for, Estella.  Will you rest here alittle?"

"Yes, I am to rest here a little, and I am to drink some tea, andyou are to take care of me the while."

She drew her arm through mine, as if it must be done, and Irequested a waiter who had been staring at the coach like a man whohad never seen such a thing in his life, to show us a privatesitting-room.  Upon that, he pulled out a napkin, as if it were amagic clew without which he couldn't find the way up stairs, andled us to the black hole of the establishment, fitted up with adiminishing mirror (quite a superfluous article, considering thehole's proportions), an anchovy sauce-cruet, and somebody'spattens.  On my objecting to this retreat, he took us into anotherroom with a dinner-table for thirty, and in the grate a scorchedleaf of a copy-book under a bushel of coal-dust.  Having looked atthis extinct conflagration and shaken his head, he took my order;which, proving to be merely, "Some tea for the lady," sent him outof the room in a very low state of mind.

I was, and I am, sensible that the air of this chamber, in itsstrong combination of stable with soup-stock, might have led one toinfer that the coaching department was not doing well, and that theenterprising proprietor was boiling down the horses for therefreshment department.  Yet the room was all in all to me, Estellabeing in it.  I thought that with her I could have been happy therefor life.  (I was not at all happy there at the time, observe, and Iknew it well.)

"Where are you going to, at Richmond?" I asked Estella.

"I am going to live," said she, "at a great expense, with a ladythere, who has the power--or says she has--of taking me about,and introducing me, and showing people to me and showing me topeople."

"I suppose you will be glad of variety and admiration?"

"Yes, I suppose so."

She answered so carelessly, that I said, "You speak of yourself asif you were some one else."

"Where did you learn how I speak of others?  Come, come," saidEstella, smiling delightfully, "you must not expect me to go toschool to you; I must talk in my own way.  How do you thrive withMr. Pocket?"

"I live quite pleasantly there; at least--" It appeared to me thatI was losing a chance.

"At least?" repeated Estella.

"As pleasantly as I could anywhere, away from you."

"You silly boy," said Estella, quite composedly, "how can you talksuch nonsense?  Your friend Mr. Matthew, I believe, is superior tothe rest of his family?"

"Very superior indeed.  He is nobody's enemy--"

--"Don't add but his own," interposed Estella, "for I hate that classof man.  But he really is disinterested, and above small jealousyand spite, I have heard?"

"I am sure I have every reason to say so."

"You have not every reason to say so of the rest of his people,"said Estella, nodding at me with an expression of face that was atonce grave and rallying, "for they beset Miss Havisham with reportsand insinuations to your disadvantage.  They watch you, misrepresentyou, write letters about you (anonymous sometimes), and you are thetorment and the occupation of their lives.  You can scarcely realizeto yourself the hatred those people feel for you."

"They do me no harm, I hope?"

Instead of answering, Estella burst out laughing.  This was verysingular to me, and I looked at her in considerable perplexity.When she left off--and she had not laughed languidly, but withreal enjoyment--I said, in my diffident way with her,--

"I hope I may suppose that you would not be amused if they did meany harm."

"No, no you may be sure of that," said Estella.  "You may be certainthat I laugh because they fail.  O, those people with MissHavisham, and the tortures they undergo!"  She laughed again, andeven now when she had told me why, her laughter was very singularto me, for I could not doubt its being genuine, and yet it seemedtoo much for the occasion.  I thought there must really be somethingmore here than I knew; she saw the thought in my mind, and answeredit.

"It is not easy for even you."  said Estella, "to know whatsatisfaction it gives me to see those people thwarted, or what anenjoyable sense of the ridiculous I have when they are maderidiculous.  For you were not brought up in that strange house froma mere baby.  I was.  You had not your little wits sharpened bytheir intriguing against you, suppressed and defenceless, under themask of sympathy and pity and what not that is soft and soothing. I had.  You did not gradually open your round childish eyes widerand wider to the discovery of that impostor of a woman whocalculates her stores of peace of mind for when she wakes up in thenight.  I did."

It was no laughing matter with Estella now, nor was she summoningthese remembrances from any shallow place.  I would not have beenthe cause of that look of hers for all my expectations in a heap.

"Two things I can tell you," said Estella.  "First, notwithstandingthe proverb that constant dropping will wear away a stone, you mayset your mind at rest that these people never will--never would,in hundred years--impair your ground with Miss Havisham, in anyparticular, great or small.  Second, I am beholden to you as thecause of their being so busy and so mean in vain, and there is myhand upon it."

As she gave it to me playfully,--for her darker mood had been butMomentary,--I held it and put it to my lips.  "You ridiculous boy,"said Estella, "will you never take warning?  Or do you kiss my handin the same spirit in which I once let you kiss my cheek?"

"What spirit was that?" said I.

"I must think a moment. A spirit of contempt for the fawners andplotters."

"If I say yes, may I kiss the cheek again?"

"You should have asked before you touched the hand.  But, yes, ifyou like."

I leaned down, and her calm face was like a statue's.  "Now," saidEstella, gliding away the instant I touched her cheek, "you are totake care that I have some tea, and you are to take me toRichmond."

Her reverting to this tone as if our association were forced uponus, and we were mere puppets, gave me pain; but everything in ourintercourse did give me pain.  Whatever her tone with me happened tobe, I could put no trust in it, and build no hope on it; and yet Iwent on against trust and against hope.  Why repeat it a thousandtimes?  So it always was.

I rang for the tea, and the waiter, reappearing with his magicclew, brought in by degrees some fifty adjuncts to that refreshment,but of tea not a glimpse.  A teaboard, cups and saucers, plates,knives and forks (including carvers), spoons (various),saltcellars, a meek little muffin confined with the utmostprecaution under a strong iron cover, Moses in the bulrushestypified by a soft bit of butter in a quantity of parsley, a paleloaf with a powdered head, two proof impressions of the bars of thekitchen fireplace on triangular bits of bread, and ultimately afat family urn; which the waiter staggered in with, expressing inhis countenance burden and suffering.  After a prolonged absence atthis stage of the entertainment, he at length came back with acasket of precious appearance containing twigs.  These I steeped inhot water, and so from the whole of these appliances extracted onecup of I don't know what for Estella.

The bill paid, and the waiter remembered, and the ostler notforgotten, and the chambermaid taken into consideration,--in aword, the whole house bribed into a state of contempt andanimosity, and Estella's purse much lightened,--we got into ourpost-coach and drove away.  Turning into Cheapside and rattling upNewgate Street, we were soon under the walls of which I was soashamed.

"What place is that?" Estella asked me.

I made a foolish pretence of not at first recognizing it, and thentold her.  As she looked at it, and drew in her head again,murmuring, "Wretches!"  I would not have confessed to my visit forany consideration.

"Mr. Jaggers," said I, by way of putting it neatly on somebody else,"has the reputation of being more in the secrets of that dismalplace than any man in London."

"He is more in the secrets of every place, I think," said Estella,in a low voice.

"You have been accustomed to see him often, I suppose?"

"I have been accustomed to see him at uncertain intervals, eversince I can remember.  But I know him no better now, than I didbefore I could speak plainly.  What is your own experience of him?Do you advance with him?"

"Once habituated to his distrustful manner," said I, "I have donevery well."

"Are you intimate?"

"I have dined with him at his private house."

"I fancy," said Estella, shrinking "that must be a curious place."

"It is a curious place."

I should have been chary of discussing my guardian too freely evenwith her; but I should have gone on with the subject so far as todescribe the dinner in Gerrard Street, if we had not then come intoa sudden glare of gas.  It seemed, while it lasted, to be all alightand alive with that inexplicable feeling I had had before; and whenwe were out of it, I was as much dazed for a few moments as if Ihad been in lightning.

So we fell into other talk, and it was principally about the wayby which we were travelling, and about what parts of London lay onthis side of it, and what on that.  The great city was almost new toher, she told me, for she had never left Miss Havisham'sneighborhood until she had gone to France, and she had merelypassed through London then in going and returning.  I asked her ifmy guardian had any charge of her while she remained here?  To thatshe emphatically said "God forbid!" and no more.

It was impossible for me to avoid seeing that she cared to attractme; that she made herself winning, and would have won me even ifthe task had needed pains.  Yet this made me none the happier, foreven if she had not taken that tone of our being disposed of byothers, I should have felt that she held my heart in her handbecause she wilfully chose to do it, and not because it would havewrung any tenderness in her to crush it and throw it away.

When we passed through Hammersmith, I showed her where Mr. MatthewPocket lived, and said it was no great way from Richmond, and thatI hoped I should see her sometimes.

"O yes, you are to see me; you are to come when you think proper;you are to be mentioned to the family; indeed you are alreadymentioned."

I inquired was it a large household she was going to be a memberof?

"No; there are only two; mother and daughter.  The mother is a ladyof some station, though not averse to increasing her income."

"I wonder Miss Havisham could part with you again so soon."

"It is a part of Miss Havisham's plans for me, Pip," said Estella,with a sigh, as if she were tired; "I am to write to her constantlyand see her regularly and report how I go on,--I and the jewels,--for they are nearly all mine now."

It was the first time she had ever called me by my name.  Of courseshe did so purposely, and knew that I should treasure it up.

We came to Richmond all too soon, and our destination there was ahouse by the green,--a staid old house, where hoops and powder andpatches, embroidered coats, rolled stockings, ruffles and swords, hadhad their court days many a time.  Some ancient trees before thehouse were still cut into fashions as formal and unnatural as thehoops and wigs and stiff skirts; but their own allotted places inthe great procession of the dead were not far off, and they wouldsoon drop into them and go the silent way of the rest.

A bell with an old voice--which I dare say in its time had oftensaid to the house, Here is the green farthingale, Here is thediamond-hilted sword, Here are the shoes with red heels and the bluesolitaire--sounded gravely in the moonlight, and twocherry-colored maids came fluttering out to receive Estella.  Thedoorway soon absorbed her boxes, and she gave me her hand and asmile, and said good night, and was absorbed likewise.  And still Istood looking at the house, thinking how happy I should be if Ilived there with her, and knowing that I never was happy with her,but always miserable.

I got into the carriage to be taken back to Hammersmith, and I gotin with a bad heart-ache, and I got out with a worse heart-ache.  Atour own door, I found little Jane Pocket coming home from a littleparty escorted by her little lover; and I envied her little lover,in spite of his being subject to Flopson.

Mr. Pocket was out lecturing; for, he was a most delightful lectureron domestic economy, and his treatises on the management ofchildren and servants were considered the very best text-books onthose themes.  But Mrs. Pocket was at home, and was in a littledifficulty, on account of the baby's having been accommodated witha needle-case to keep him quiet during the unaccountable absence(with a relative in the Foot Guards) of Millers.  And more needleswere missing than it could be regarded as quite wholesome for apatient of such tender years either to apply externally or to takeas a tonic.

Mr. Pocket being justly celebrated for giving most excellentpractical advice, and for having a clear and sound perception ofthings and a highly judicious mind, I had some notion in myheart-ache of begging him to accept my confidence.  But happening tolook up at Mrs. Pocket as she sat reading her book of dignitiesafter prescribing Bed as a sovereign remedy for baby, I thought--Well--No, I wouldn't.

Chapter XXXIV

As I had grown accustomed to my expectations, I had insensiblybegun to notice their effect upon myself and those around me.  Theirinfluence on my own character I disguised from my recognition asmuch as possible, but I knew very well that it was not all good.  Ilived in a state of chronic uneasiness respecting my behavior toJoe.  My conscience was not by any means comfortable about Biddy.When I woke up in the night,--like Camilla,--I used to think, witha weariness on my spirits, that I should have been happier andbetter if I had never seen Miss Havisham's face, and had risen tomanhood content to be partners with Joe in the honest old forge.Many a time of an evening, when I sat alone looking at the fire, Ithought, after all there was no fire like the forge fire and thekitchen fire at home.

Yet Estella was so inseparable from all my restlessness anddisquiet of mind, that I really fell into confusion as to thelimits of my own part in its production.  That is to say, supposingI had had no expectations, and yet had had Estella to think of, Icould not make out to my satisfaction that I should have done muchbetter.  Now, concerning the influence of my position on others, Iwas in no such difficulty, and so I perceived--though dimly enoughperhaps--that it was not beneficial to anybody, and, above all,that it was not beneficial to Herbert.  My lavish habits led hiseasy nature into expenses that he could not afford, corrupted thesimplicity of his life, and disturbed his peace with anxieties andregrets.  I was not at all remorseful for having unwittingly setthose other branches of the Pocket family to the poor arts theypractised; because such littlenesses were their natural bent, andwould have been evoked by anybody else, if I had left themslumbering.  But Herbert's was a very different case, and it oftencaused me a twinge to think that I had done him evil service incrowding his sparely furnished chambers with incongruous upholsterywork, and placing the Canary-breasted Avenger at his disposal.

So now, as an infallible way of making little ease great ease, Ibegan to contract a quantity of debt.  I could hardly begin butHerbert must begin too, so he soon followed.  At Startop'ssuggestion, we put ourselves down for election into a club calledThe Finches of the Grove:  the object of which institution I havenever divined, if it were not that the members should dineexpensively once a fortnight, to quarrel among themselves as muchas possible after dinner, and to cause six waiters to get drunk onthe stairs.  I know that these gratifying social ends were soinvariably accomplished, that Herbert and I understood nothing elseto be referred to in the first standing toast of the society:  whichran "Gentlemen, may the present promotion of good feeling everreign predominant among the Finches of the Grove."

The Finches spent their money foolishly (the Hotel we dined at wasin Covent Garden), and the first Finch I saw when I had the honorof joining the Grove was Bentley Drummle, at that time flounderingabout town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage tothe posts at the street corners.  Occasionally, he shot himself outof his equipage headforemost over the apron; and I saw him on oneoccasion deliver himself at the door of the Grove in thisunintentional way--like coals.  But here I anticipate a little, forI was not a Finch, and could not be, according to the sacred lawsof the society, until I came of age.

In my confidence in my own resources, I would willingly have takenHerbert's expenses on myself; but Herbert was proud, and I couldmake no such proposal to him.  So he got into difficulties in everydirection, and continued to look about him.  When we gradually fellinto keeping late hours and late company, I noticed that he lookedabout him with a desponding eye at breakfast-time; that he began tolook about him more hopefully about mid-day; that he drooped whenhe came into dinner; that he seemed to descry Capital in thedistance, rather clearly, after dinner; that he all but realizedCapital towards midnight; and that at about two o'clock in themorning, he became so deeply despondent again as to talk of buyinga rifle and going to America, with a general purpose of compellingbuffaloes to make his fortune.

I was usually at Hammersmith about half the week, and when I was atHammersmith I haunted Richmond, whereof separately by and by.Herbert would often come to Hammersmith when I was there, and Ithink at those seasons his father would occasionally have somepassing perception that the opening he was looking for, had notappeared yet.  But in the general tumbling up of the family, histumbling out in life somewhere, was a thing to transact itselfsomehow.  In the meantime Mr. Pocket grew grayer, and tried oftenerto lift himself out of his perplexities by the hair.  While Mrs.Pocket tripped up the family with her footstool, read her book ofdignities, lost her pocket-handkerchief, told us about hergrandpapa, and taught the young idea how to shoot, by shooting itinto bed whenever it attracted her notice.

As I am now generalizing a period of my life with the object ofclearing my way before me, I can scarcely do so better than by atonce completing the description of our usual manners and customs atBarnard's Inn.

We spent as much money as we could, and got as little for it aspeople could make up their minds to give us.  We were always more orless miserable, and most of our acquaintance were in the samecondition.  There was a gay fiction among us that we were constantlyenjoying ourselves, and a skeleton truth that we never did.  To thebest of my belief, our case was in the last aspect a rather commonone.

Every morning, with an air ever new, Herbert went into the City tolook about him.  I often paid him a visit in the dark back-room inwhich he consorted with an ink-jar, a hat-peg, a coal-box, astring-box, an almanac, a desk and stool, and a ruler; and I donot remember that I ever saw him do anything else but look abouthim.  If we all did what we undertake to do, as faithfully asHerbert did, we might live in a Republic of the Virtues.  He hadnothing else to do, poor fellow, except at a certain hour of everyafternoon to "go to Lloyd's"--in observance of a ceremony ofseeing his principal, I think.  He never did anything else inconnection with Lloyd's that I could find out, except come backagain.  When he felt his case unusually serious, and that hepositively must find an opening, he would go on 'Change at a busytime, and walk in and out, in a kind of gloomy country dancefigure, among the assembled magnates.  "For," says Herbert to me,coming home to dinner on one of those special occasions, "I findthe truth to be, Handel, that an opening won't come to one, but onemust go to it,--so I have been."

If we had been less attached to one another, I think we must havehated one another regularly every morning.  I detested the chambersbeyond expression at that period of repentance, and could notendure the sight of the Avenger's livery; which had a moreexpensive and a less remunerative appearance then than at anyother time in the four-and-twenty hours.  As we got more and moreinto debt, breakfast became a hollower and hollower form, and, beingon one occasion at breakfast-time threatened (by letter) with legalproceedings, "not unwholly unconnected," as my local paper mightput it, "with jewelery," I went so far as to seize the Avenger byhis blue collar and shake him off his feet,--so that he wasactually in the air, like a booted Cupid,--for presuming to supposethat we wanted a roll.

At certain times--meaning at uncertain times, for they depended onour humor--I would say to Herbert, as if it were a remarkablediscovery,--

"My dear Herbert, we are getting on badly."

"My dear Handel," Herbert would say to me, in all sincerity, if youwill believe me, those very words were on my lips, by a strangecoincidence."

"Then, Herbert," I would respond, "let us look into out affairs."

We always derived profound satisfaction from making an appointmentfor this purpose.  I always thought this was business, this was theway to confront the thing, this was the way to take the foe by thethroat.  And I know Herbert thought so too.

We ordered something rather special for dinner, with a bottle ofsomething similarly out of the common way, in order that our mindsmight be fortified for the occasion, and we might come well up tothe mark.  Dinner over, we produced a bundle of pens, a copioussupply of ink, and a goodly show of writing and blotting paper.For there was something very comfortable in having plenty ofstationery.

I would then take a sheet of paper, and write across the top of it,in a neat hand, the heading, "Memorandum of Pip's debts"; withBarnard's Inn and the date very carefully added.  Herbert would alsotake a sheet of paper, and write across it with similarformalities, "Memorandum of Herbert's debts."

Each of us would then refer to a confused heap of papers at hisside, which had been thrown into drawers, worn into holes inpockets, half burnt in lighting candles, stuck for weeks into thelooking-glass, and otherwise damaged.  The sound of our pens goingrefreshed us exceedingly, insomuch that I sometimes found itdifficult to distinguish between this edifying business proceedingand actually paying the money.  In point of meritorious character,the two things seemed about equal.

When we had written a little while, I would ask Herbert how he goton?  Herbert probably would have been scratching his head in a mostrueful manner at the sight of his accumulating figures.

"They are mounting up, Handel," Herbert would say; "upon my life,they are mounting up."

"Be firm, Herbert," I would retort, plying my own pen with greatassiduity.  "Look the thing in the face.  Look into your affairs.Stare them out of countenance."

"So I would, Handel, only they are staring me out of countenance."

However, my determined manner would have its effect, and Herbertwould fall to work again.  After a time he would give up once more,on the plea that he had not got Cobbs's bill, or Lobbs's, orNobbs's, as the case might be.

"Then, Herbert, estimate; estimate it in round numbers, and put itdown."

"What a fellow of resource you are!" my friend would reply, withadmiration.  "Really your business powers are very remarkable."

I thought so too.  I established with myself, on these occasions, thereputation of a first-rate man of business,--prompt, decisive,energetic, clear, cool-headed.  When I had got all myresponsibilities down upon my list, I compared each with the bill,and ticked it off.  My self-approval when I ticked an entry wasquite a luxurious sensation.  When I had no more ticks to make, Ifolded all my bills up uniformly, docketed each on the back, andtied the whole into a symmetrical bundle.  Then I did the same forHerbert (who modestly said he had not my administrative genius),and felt that I had brought his affairs into a focus for him.

My business habits had one other bright feature, which I called"leaving a Margin."  For example; supposing Herbert's debts to beone hundred and sixty-four pounds four-and-twopence, I would say,"Leave a margin, and put them down at two hundred."  Or, supposingmy own to be four times as much, I would leave a margin, and putthem down at seven hundred.  I had the highest opinion of the wisdomof this same Margin, but I am bound to acknowledge that on lookingback, I deem it to have been an expensive device.  For, we alwaysran into new debt immediately, to the full extent of the margin,and sometimes, in the sense of freedom and solvency it imparted,got pretty far on into another margin.

But there was a calm, a rest, a virtuous hush, consequent on theseexaminations of our affairs that gave me, for the time, anadmirable opinion of myself.  Soothed by my exertions, my method,and Herbert's compliments, I would sit with his symmetrical bundleand my own on the table before me among the stationary, and feellike a Bank of some sort, rather than a private individual.

We shut our outer door on these solemn occasions, in order that wemight not be interrupted.  I had fallen into my serene state oneevening, when we heard a letter dropped through the slit in thesaid door, and fall on the ground.  "It's for you, Handel," saidHerbert, going out and coming back with it, "and I hope there isnothing the matter."  This was in allusion to its heavy black sealand border.

The letter was signed Trabb & Co., and its contents were simply,that I was an honored sir, and that they begged to inform me thatMrs. J. Gargery had departed this life on Monday last at twentyminutes past six in the evening, and that my attendance wasrequested at the interment on Monday next at three o'clock in theafternoon.

Chapter XXXV

It was the first time that a grave had opened in my road of life,and the gap it made in the smooth ground was wonderful.  The figureof my sister in her chair by the kitchen fire, haunted me night andday.  That the place could possibly be, without her, was somethingmy mind seemed unable to compass; and whereas she had seldom ornever been in my thoughts of late, I had now the strangest ideasthat she was coming towards me in the street, or that she wouldpresently knock at the door.  In my rooms too, with which she hadnever been at all associated, there was at once the blankness ofdeath and a perpetual suggestion of the sound of her voice or theturn of her face or figure, as if she were still alive and had beenoften there.

Whatever my fortunes might have been, I could scarcely haverecalled my sister with much tenderness.  But I suppose there is ashock of regret which may exist without much tenderness.  Under itsinfluence (and perhaps to make up for the want of the softerfeeling) I was seized with a violent indignation against theassailant from whom she had suffered so much; and I felt that onsufficient proof I could have revengefully pursued Orlick, or anyone else, to the last extremity.

Having written to Joe, to offer him consolation, and to assure him thatI would come to the funeral, I passed the intermediate days in thecurious state of mind I have glanced at.  I went down early in themorning, and alighted at the Blue Boar in good time to walk over tothe forge.

It was fine summer weather again, and, as I walked along, the timeswhen I was a little helpless creature, and my sister did not spareme, vividly returned.  But they returned with a gentle tone uponthem that softened even the edge of Tickler.  For now, the verybreath of the beans and clover whispered to my heart that the daymust come when it would be well for my memory that others walkingin the sunshine should be softened as they thought of me.

At last I came within sight of the house, and saw that Trabb andCo. had put in a funereal execution and taken possession.  Twodismally absurd persons, each ostentatiously exhibiting a crutchdone up in a black bandage,--as if that instrument could possiblycommunicate any comfort to anybody,--were posted at the front door;and in one of them I recognized a postboy discharged from the Boarfor turning a young couple into a sawpit on their bridal morning,in consequence of intoxication rendering it necessary for him toride his horse clasped round the neck with both arms.  All thechildren of the village, and most of the women, were admiring thesesable warders and the closed windows of the house and forge; and asI came up, one of the two warders (the postboy) knocked at the door,--implying that I was far too much exhausted by grief to havestrength remaining to knock for myself.

Another sable warder (a carpenter, who had once eaten two geese fora wager) opened the door, and showed me into the best parlor.Here, Mr. Trabb had taken unto himself the best table, and had gotall the leaves up, and was holding a kind of black Bazaar, with theaid of a quantity of black pins.  At the moment of my arrival, hehad just finished putting somebody's hat into black long-clothes,like an African baby; so he held out his hand for mine.  But I,misled by the action, and confused by the occasion, shook handswith him with every testimony of warm affection.

Poor dear Joe, entangled in a little black cloak tied in a largebow under his chin, was seated apart at the upper end of the room;where, as chief mourner, he had evidently been stationed by Trabb.When I bent down and said to him, "Dear Joe, how are you?" he said,"Pip, old chap, you knowed her when she were a fine figure of a--"and clasped my hand and said no more.

Biddy, looking very neat and modest in her black dress, wentquietly here and there, and was very helpful.  When I had spoken toBiddy, as I thought it not a time for talking I went and sat downnear Joe, and there began to wonder in what part of the house it--she--my sister--was.  The air of the parlor being faint with thesmell of sweet-cake, I looked about for the table of refreshments;it was scarcely visible until one had got accustomed to the gloom,but there was a cut-up plum cake upon it, and there were cut-uporanges, and sandwiches, and biscuits, and two decanters that Iknew very well as ornaments, but had never seen used in all mylife; one full of port, and one of sherry.  Standing at this table,I became conscious of the servile Pumblechook in a black cloak andseveral yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself, andmaking obsequious movements to catch my attention.  The moment hesucceeded, he came over to me (breathing sherry and crumbs), andsaid in a subdued voice, "May I, dear sir?" and did.  I thendescried Mr. and Mrs. Hubble; the last-named in a decent speechlessparoxysm in a corner.  We were all going to "follow," and were allin course of being tied up separately (by Trabb) into ridiculousbundles.

"Which I meantersay, Pip," Joe whispered me, as we were being whatMr. Trabb called "formed" in the parlor, two and two,--and it wasdreadfully like a preparation for some grim kind of dance; "which Imeantersay, sir, as I would in preference have carried her to thechurch myself, along with three or four friendly ones wot come toit with willing harts and arms, but it were considered wot theneighbors would look down on such and would be of opinions as itwere wanting in respect."

"Pocket-handkerchiefs out, all!" cried Mr. Trabb at this point, in adepressed business-like voice.  "Pocket-handkerchiefs out!  We areready!"

So we all put our pocket-handkerchiefs to our faces, as if ournoses were bleeding, and filed out two and two; Joe and I; Biddyand Pumblechook; Mr. and Mrs. Hubble.  The remains of my poor sisterhad been brought round by the kitchen door, and, it being a pointof Undertaking ceremony that the six bearers must be stifled andblinded under a horrible black velvet housing with a white border,the whole looked like a blind monster with twelve human legs,shuffling and blundering along, under the guidance of two keepers,--the postboy and his comrade.

The neighborhood, however, highly approved of these arrangements,and we were much admired as we went through the village; the moreyouthful and vigorous part of the community making dashes now andthen to cut us off, and lying in wait to intercept us at points ofvantage.  At such times the more exuberant among them called out inan excited manner on our emergence round some corner of expectancy,"Here they come!" "Here they are!" and we were all but cheered.  Inthis progress I was much annoyed by the abject Pumblechook, who,being behind me, persisted all the way as a delicate attention inarranging my streaming hatband, and smoothing my cloak.  My thoughtswere further distracted by the excessive pride of Mr. and Mrs.Hubble, who were surpassingly conceited and vainglorious in beingmembers of so distinguished a procession.

And now the range of marshes lay clear before us, with the sailsof the ships on the river growing out of it; and we went into thechurchyard, close to the graves of my unknown parents, PhilipPirrip, late of this parish, and Also Georgiana, Wife of the Above.And there, my sister was laid quietly in the earth, while the larkssang high above it, and the light wind strewed it with beautifulshadows of clouds and trees.

Of the conduct of the worldly minded Pumblechook while this wasdoing, I desire to say no more than it was all addressed to me; andthat even when those noble passages were read which remind humanityhow it brought nothing into the world and can take nothing out, andhow it fleeth like a shadow and never continueth long in one stay,I heard him cough a reservation of the case of a young gentlemanwho came unexpectedly into large property.  When we got back, he hadthe hardihood to tell me that he wished my sister could have knownI had done her so much honor, and to hint that she would haveconsidered it reasonably purchased at the price of her death.  Afterthat, he drank all the rest of the sherry, and Mr. Hubble drank theport, and the two talked (which I have since observed to becustomary in such cases) as if they were of quite another race fromthe deceased, and were notoriously immortal.  Finally, he went awaywith Mr. and Mrs. Hubble,--to make an evening of it, I felt sure, andto tell the Jolly Bargemen that he was the founder of my fortunesand my earliest benefactor.

When they were all gone, and when Trabb and his men--but not hisBoy; I looked for him--had crammed their mummery into bags, andwere gone too, the house felt wholesomer.  Soon afterwards, Biddy,Joe, and I, had a cold dinner together; but we dined in the bestparlor, not in the old kitchen, and Joe was so exceedinglyparticular what he did with his knife and fork and the saltcellarand what not, that there was great restraint upon us.  But afterdinner, when I made him take his pipe, and when I had loitered withhim about the forge, and when we sat down together on the greatblock of stone outside it, we got on better.  I noticed that afterthe funeral Joe changed his clothes so far, as to make a compromisebetween his Sunday dress and working dress; in which the dearfellow looked natural, and like the Man he was.

He was very much pleased by my asking if I might sleep in my ownlittle room, and I was pleased too; for I felt that I had donerather a great thing in making the request.  When the shadows ofevening were closing in, I took an opportunity of getting into thegarden with Biddy for a little talk.

"Biddy," said I, "I think you might have written to me about thesesad matters."

"Do you, Mr. Pip?" said Biddy.  "I should have written if I hadthought that."

"Don't suppose that I mean to be unkind, Biddy, when I say Iconsider that you ought to have thought that."

"Do you, Mr. Pip?"

She was so quiet, and had such an orderly, good, and pretty waywith her, that I did not like the thought of making her cry again.After looking a little at her downcast eyes as she walked besideme, I gave up that point.

"I suppose it will be difficult for you to remain here now, Biddydear?"

"Oh!  I can't do so, Mr. Pip," said Biddy, in a tone of regret butstill of quiet conviction.  "I have been speaking to Mrs. Hubble, andI am going to her to-morrow.  I hope we shall be able to take somecare of Mr. Gargery, together, until he settles down."

"How are you going to live, Biddy?  If you want any mo--"

"How am I going to live?" repeated Biddy, striking in, with amomentary flush upon her face.  "I'll tell you, Mr. Pip.  I am goingto try to get the place of mistress in the new school nearlyfinished here.  I can be well recommended by all the neighbors, andI hope I can be industrious and patient, and teach myself while Iteach others.  You know, Mr. Pip," pursued Biddy, with a smile, asshe raised her eyes to my face, "the new schools are not like theold, but I learnt a good deal from you after that time, and havehad time since then to improve."

"I think you would always improve, Biddy, under any circumstances."

"Ah!  Except in my bad side of human nature," murmured Biddy.

It was not so much a reproach as an irresistible thinking aloud.Well!  I thought I would give up that point too.  So, I walked alittle further with Biddy, looking silently at her downcast eyes.

"I have not heard the particulars of my sister's death, Biddy."

"They are very slight, poor thing.  She had been in one of her badstates--though they had got better of late, rather than worse--for four days, when she came out of it in the evening, just attea-time, and said quite plainly, 'Joe.'  As she had never said anyword for a long while, I ran and fetched in Mr. Gargery from theforge.  She made signs to me that she wanted him to sit down closeto her, and wanted me to put her arms round his neck.  So I put themround his neck, and she laid her head down on his shoulder quitecontent and satisfied.  And so she presently said 'Joe' again, andonce 'Pardon,' and once 'Pip.'  And so she never lifted her head upany more, and it was just an hour later when we laid it down on herown bed, because we found she was gone."

Biddy cried; the darkening garden, and the lane, and the stars thatwere coming out, were blurred in my own sight.

"Nothing was ever discovered, Biddy?"

"Nothing."

"Do you know what is become of Orlick?"

"I should think from the color of his clothes that he is workingin the quarries."

"Of course you have seen him then?--Why are you looking at thatdark tree in the lane?"

"I saw him there, on the night she died."

"That was not the last time either, Biddy?"

"No; I have seen him there, since we have been walking here.--Itis of no use," said Biddy, laying her hand upon my arm, as I wasfor running out, "you know I would not deceive you; he was notthere a minute, and he is gone."

It revived my utmost indignation to find that she was still pursuedby this fellow, and I felt inveterate against him.  I told her so,and told her that I would spend any money or take any pains todrive him out of that country.  By degrees she led me into moretemperate talk, and she told me how Joe loved me, and how Joe nevercomplained of anything,--she didn't say, of me; she had no need; Iknew what she meant,--but ever did his duty in his way of life,with a strong hand, a quiet tongue, and a gentle heart.

"Indeed, it would be hard to say too much for him," said I; "andBiddy, we must often speak of these things, for of course I shallbe often down here now.  I am not going to leave poor Joe alone."

Biddy said never a single word.

"Biddy, don't you hear me?"

"Yes, Mr. Pip."

"Not to mention your calling me Mr. Pip,--which appears to me to bein bad taste, Biddy,--what do you mean?"

"What do I mean?" asked Biddy, timidly.

"Biddy," said I, in a virtuously self-asserting manner, "I mustrequest to know what you mean by this?"

"By this?" said Biddy.

"Now, don't echo," I retorted.  "You used not to echo, Biddy."

"Used not!" said Biddy.  "O Mr. Pip!  Used!"

Well!  I rather thought I would give up that point too.  Afteranother silent turn in the garden, I fell back on the mainposition.

"Biddy," said I, "I made a remark respecting my coming down hereoften, to see Joe, which you received with a marked silence.  Havethe goodness, Biddy, to tell me why."

"Are you quite sure, then, that you WILL come to see him often?"asked Biddy, stopping in the narrow garden walk, and looking at meunder the stars with a clear and honest eye.

"O dear me!" said I, as if I found myself compelled to give upBiddy in despair.  "This really is a very bad side of humannature!  Don't say any more, if you please, Biddy.  This shocks mevery much."

For which cogent reason I kept Biddy at a distance during supper,and when I went up to my own old little room, took as stately aleave of her as I could, in my murmuring soul, deem reconcilablewith the churchyard and the event of the day.  As often as I wasrestless in the night, and that was every quarter of an hour, Ireflected what an unkindness, what an injury, what an injustice,Biddy had done me.

Early in the morning I was to go.  Early in the morning I was out,and looking in, unseen, at one of the wooden windows of the forge.There I stood, for minutes, looking at Joe, already at work with aglow of health and strength upon his face that made it show as ifthe bright sun of the life in store for him were shining on it.

"Good by, dear Joe!--No, don't wipe it off--for God's sake, giveme your blackened hand!--I shall be down soon and often."

"Never too soon, sir," said Joe, "and never too often, Pip!"

Biddy was waiting for me at the kitchen door, with a mug of newmilk and a crust of bread.  "Biddy," said I, when I gave her my handat parting, "I am not angry, but I am hurt."

"No, don't be hurt," she pleaded quite pathetically; "let only mebe hurt, if I have been ungenerous."

Once more, the mists were rising as I walked away.  If theydisclosed to me, as I suspect they did, that I should not comeback, and that Biddy was quite right, all I can say is,--they werequite right too.

Chapter XXXVI

Herbert and I went on from bad to worse, in the way of increasingour debts, looking into our affairs, leaving Margins, and the likeexemplary transactions; and Time went on, whether or no, as he hasa way of doing; and I came of age,--in fulfilment of Herbert'sprediction, that I should do so before I knew where I was.

Herbert himself had come of age eight months before me.  As he hadnothing else than his majority to come into, the event did not makea profound sensation in Barnard's Inn.  But we had looked forward tomy one-and-twentieth birthday, with a crowd of speculations andanticipations, for we had both considered that my guardian couldhardly help saying something definite on that occasion.

I had taken care to have it well understood in Little Britain whenmy birthday was.  On the day before it, I received an official notefrom Wemmick, informing me that Mr. Jaggers would be glad if I wouldcall upon him at five in the afternoon of the auspicious day.  Thisconvinced us that something great was to happen, and threw me intoan unusual flutter when I repaired to my guardian's office, a modelof punctuality.

In the outer office Wemmick offered me his congratulations, andincidentally rubbed the side of his nose with a folded piece oftissue-paper that I liked the look of.  But he said nothingrespecting it, and motioned me with a nod into my guardian's room.It was November, and my guardian was standing before his fireleaning his back against the chimney-piece, with his hands underhis coattails.

"Well, Pip," said he, "I must call you Mr. Pip to-day.Congratulations, Mr. Pip."

We shook hands,--he was always a remarkably short shaker,--and Ithanked him.

"Take a chair, Mr. Pip," said my guardian.

As I sat down, and he preserved his attitude and bent his brows athis boots, I felt at a disadvantage, which reminded me of that oldtime when I had been put upon a tombstone.  The two ghastly casts onthe shelf were not far from him, and their expression was as ifthey were making a stupid apoplectic attempt to attend to theconversation.

"Now my young friend," my guardian began, as if I were a witness inthe box, "I am going to have a word or two with you."

"If you please, sir."

"What do you suppose," said Mr. Jaggers, bending forward to look atthe ground, and then throwing his head back to look at the ceiling,--"what do you suppose you are living at the rate of?"

"At the rate of, sir?"

"At," repeated Mr. Jaggers, still looking at the ceiling, "the--rate--of?"  And then looked all round the room, and paused with hispocket-handkerchief in his hand, half-way to his nose.

I had looked into my affairs so often, that I had thoroughlydestroyed any slight notion I might ever have had of theirbearings.  Reluctantly, I confessed myself quite unable to answerthe question.  This reply seemed agreeable to Mr. Jaggers, who said,"I thought so!" and blew his nose with an air of satisfaction.

"Now, I have asked you a question, my friend," said Mr. Jaggers."Have you anything to ask me?"

"Of course it would be a great relief to me to ask you severalquestions, sir; but I remember your prohibition."

"Ask one," said Mr. Jaggers.

"Is my benefactor to be made known to me to-day?"

"No.  Ask another."

"Is that confidence to be imparted to me soon?"

"Waive that, a moment," said Mr. Jaggers, "and ask another."

I looked about me, but there appeared to be now no possible escapefrom the inquiry, "Have-I--anything to receive, sir?"  On that,Mr. Jaggers said, triumphantly, "I thought we should come to it!"and called to Wemmick to give him that piece of paper.  Wemmickappeared, handed it in, and disappeared.

"Now, Mr. Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, "attend, if you please.  You havebeen drawing pretty freely here; your name occurs pretty often inWemmick's cash-book; but you are in debt, of course?"

"I am afraid I must say yes, sir."

"You know you must say yes; don't you?" said Mr. Jaggers.

"Yes, sir."

"I don't ask you what you owe, because you don't know; and if youdid know, you wouldn't tell me; you would say less.  Yes, yes, myfriend," cried Mr. Jaggers, waving his forefinger to stop me as Imade a show of protesting:  "it's likely enough that you think youwouldn't, but you would.  You'll excuse me, but I know better thanyou.  Now, take this piece of paper in your hand.  You have got it?Very good.  Now, unfold it and tell me what it is."

"This is a bank-note," said I, "for five hundred pounds."

"That is a bank-note," repeated Mr. Jaggers, "for five hundredpounds.  And a very handsome sum of money too, I think.  You considerit so?"

"How could I do otherwise!"

"Ah!  But answer the question," said Mr. Jaggers.

"Undoubtedly."

"You consider it, undoubtedly, a handsome sum of money.  Now, thathandsome sum of money, Pip, is your own.  It is a present to you onthis day, in earnest of your expectations.  And at the rate of thathandsome sum of money per annum, and at no higher rate, you are tolive until the donor of the whole appears.  That is to say, you willnow take your money affairs entirely into your own hands, and youwill draw from Wemmick one hundred and twenty-five pounds perquarter, until you are in communication with the fountain-head, andno longer with the mere agent.  As I have told you before, I am themere agent.  I execute my instructions, and I am paid for doing so.I think them injudicious, but I am not paid for giving any opinionon their merits."

I was beginning to express my gratitude to my benefactor for thegreat liberality with which I was treated, when Mr. Jaggers stoppedme.  "I am not paid, Pip," said he, coolly, "to carry your words toany one;" and then gathered up his coat-tails, as he had gatheredup the subject, and stood frowning at his boots as if he suspectedthem of designs against him.

After a pause, I hinted,--

"There was a question just now, Mr. Jaggers, which you desired me towaive for a moment.  I hope I am doing nothing wrong in asking itagain?"

"What is it?" said he.

I might have known that he would never help me out; but it took meaback to have to shape the question afresh, as if it were quitenew.  "Is it likely," I said, after hesitating, "that my patron, thefountain-head you have spoken of, Mr. Jaggers, will soon--" there Idelicately stopped.

"Will soon what?" asked Mr. Jaggers.  "That's no question as itstands, you know."

"Will soon come to London," said I, after casting about for aprecise form of words, "or summon me anywhere else?"

"Now, here," replied Mr. Jaggers, fixing me for the first time withhis dark deep-set eyes, "we must revert to the evening when wefirst encountered one another in your village.  What did I tell youthen, Pip?"

"You told me, Mr. Jaggers, that it might be years hence when thatperson appeared."

"Just so," said Mr. Jaggers, "that's my answer."

As we looked full at one another, I felt my breath come quicker inmy strong desire to get something out of him.  And as I felt that itcame quicker, and as I felt that he saw that it came quicker, Ifelt that I had less chance than ever of getting anything out ofhim.

"Do you suppose it will still be years hence, Mr. Jaggers?"

Mr. Jaggers shook his head,--not in negativing the question, but inaltogether negativing the notion that he could anyhow be got toanswer it,--and the two horrible casts of the twitched faceslooked, when my eyes strayed up to them, as if they had come to acrisis in their suspended attention, and were going to sneeze.

"Come!" said Mr. Jaggers, warming the backs of his legs with thebacks of his warmed hands, "I'll be plain with you, my friend Pip.That's a question I must not be asked.  You'll understand thatbetter, when I tell you it's a question that might compromise me.Come!  I'll go a little further with you; I'll say something more."

He bent down so low to frown at his boots, that he was able to rubthe calves of his legs in the pause he made.

"When that person discloses," said Mr. Jaggers, straighteninghimself, "you and that person will settle your own affairs.  Whenthat person discloses, my part in this business will cease anddetermine.  When that person discloses, it will not be necessary forme to know anything about it.  And that's all I have got to say."

We looked at one another until I withdrew my eyes, and lookedthoughtfully at the floor.  From this last speech I derived thenotion that Miss Havisham, for some reason or no reason, had nottaken him into her confidence as to her designing me for Estella;that he resented this, and felt a jealousy about it; or that hereally did object to that scheme, and would have nothing to do withit.  When I raised my eyes again, I found that he had been shrewdlylooking at me all the time, and was doing so still.

"If that is all you have to say, sir," I remarked, "there can benothing left for me to say."

He nodded assent, and pulled out his thief-dreaded watch, and askedme where I was going to dine?  I replied at my own chambers, withHerbert.  As a necessary sequence, I asked him if he would favor uswith his company, and he promptly accepted the invitation.  But heinsisted on walking home with me, in order that I might make noextra preparation for him, and first he had a letter or two towrite, and (of course) had his hands to wash.  So I said I would gointo the outer office and talk to Wemmick.

The fact was, that when the five hundred pounds had come into mypocket, a thought had come into my head which had been often therebefore; and it appeared to me that Wemmick was a good person toadvise with concerning such thought.

He had already locked up his safe, and made preparations for goinghome.  He had left his desk, brought out his two greasy officecandlesticks and stood them in line with the snuffers on a slabnear the door, ready to be extinguished; he had raked his fire low,put his hat and great-coat ready, and was beating himself all overthe chest with his safe-key, as an athletic exercise afterbusiness.

"Mr. Wemmick," said I, "I want to ask your opinion.  I am verydesirous to serve a friend."

Wemmick tightened his post-office and shook his head, as if hisopinion were dead against any fatal weakness of that sort.

"This friend," I pursued, "is trying to get on in commercial life,but has no money, and finds it difficult and disheartening to makea beginning.  Now I want somehow to help him to a beginning."

"With money down?" said Wemmick, in a tone drier than any sawdust.

"With some money down," I replied, for an uneasy remembrance shotacross me of that symmetrical bundle of papers at home--"with somemoney down, and perhaps some anticipation of my expectations."

"Mr. Pip," said Wemmick, "I should like just to run over with you onmy fingers, if you please, the names of the various bridges up ashigh as Chelsea Reach.  Let's see; there's London, one; Southwark,two; Blackfriars, three; Waterloo, four; Westminster, five;Vauxhall, six."  He had checked off each bridge in its turn, withthe handle of his safe-key on the palm of his hand.  "There's asmany as six, you see, to choose from."

"I don't understand you," said I.

"Choose your bridge, Mr. Pip," returned Wemmick, "and take a walkupon your bridge, and pitch your money into the Thames over thecentre arch of your bridge, and you know the end of it.  Serve afriend with it, and you may know the end of it too,--but it's aless pleasant and profitable end."

I could have posted a newspaper in his mouth, he made it so wideafter saying this.

"This is very discouraging," said I.

"Meant to be so," said Wemmick.

"Then is it your opinion," I inquired, with some littleindignation, "that a man should never--"

"--Invest portable property in a friend?" said Wemmick.  "Certainlyhe should not.  Unless he wants to get rid of the friend,--and thenit becomes a question how much portable property it may be worth toget rid of him."

"And that," said I, "is your deliberate opinion, Mr. Wemmick?"

"That," he returned, "is my deliberate opinion in this office."

"Ah!" said I, pressing him, for I thought I saw him near a loopholehere; "but would that be your opinion at Walworth?"

"Mr. Pip," he replied, with gravity, "Walworth is one place, andthis office is another.  Much as the Aged is one person, and Mr.Jaggers is another.  They must not be confounded together.  MyWalworth sentiments must be taken at Walworth; none but my officialsentiments can be taken in this office."

"Very well," said I, much relieved, "then I shall look you up atWalworth, you may depend upon it."

"Mr. Pip," he returned, "you will be welcome there, in a private andpersonal capacity."

We had held this conversation in a low voice, well knowing myguardian's ears to be the sharpest of the sharp.  As he now appearedin his doorway, towelling his hands, Wemmick got on his great-coatand stood by to snuff out the candles.  We all three went into thestreet together, and from the door-step Wemmick turned his way, andMr. Jaggers and I turned ours.

I could not help wishing more than once that evening, that Mr.Jaggers had had an Aged in Gerrard Street, or a Stinger, or aSomething, or a Somebody, to unbend his brows a little.  It was anuncomfortable consideration on a twenty-first birthday, that comingof age at all seemed hardly worth while in such a guarded andsuspicious world as he made of it.  He was a thousand times betterinformed and cleverer than Wemmick, and yet I would a thousandtimes rather have had Wemmick to dinner.  And Mr. Jaggers made not mealone intensely melancholy, because, after he was gone, Herbertsaid of himself, with his eyes fixed on the fire, that he thoughthe must have committed a felony and forgotten the details of it, hefelt so dejected and guilty.

Chapter XXXVII

Deeming Sunday the best day for taking Mr. Wemmick's Walworthsentiments, I devoted the next ensuing Sunday afternoon to apilgrimage to the Castle.  On arriving before the battlements, Ifound the Union Jack flying and the drawbridge up; but undeterredby this show of defiance and resistance, I rang at the gate, andwas admitted in a most pacific manner by the Aged.

"My son, sir," said the old man, after securing the drawbridge,"rather had it in his mind that you might happen to drop in, and heleft word that he would soon be home from his afternoon's walk.  Heis very regular in his walks, is my son.  Very regular ineverything, is my son."

I nodded at the old gentleman as Wemmick himself might have nodded,and we went in and sat down by the fireside.

"You made acquaintance with my son, sir," said the old man, in hischirping way, while he warmed his hands at the blaze, "at hisoffice, I expect?"  I nodded.  "Hah!  I have heerd that my son is awonderful hand at his business, sir?"  I nodded hard.  "Yes; so theytell me.  His business is the Law?"  I nodded harder.  "Which makes itmore surprising in my son," said the old man, "for he was notbrought up to the Law, but to the Wine-Coopering."

Curious to know how the old gentleman stood informed concerning thereputation of Mr. Jaggers, I roared that name at him.  He threw meinto the greatest confusion by laughing heartily and replying in avery sprightly manner, "No, to be sure; you're right."  And to thishour I have not the faintest notion what he meant, or what joke hethought I had made.

As I could not sit there nodding at him perpetually, without makingsome other attempt to interest him, I shouted at inquiry whetherhis own calling in life had been "the Wine-Coopering."  By dint ofstraining that term out of myself several times and tapping the oldgentleman on the chest to associate it with him, I at lastsucceeded in making my meaning understood.

"No," said the old gentleman; "the warehousing, the warehousing.First, over yonder;" he appeared to mean up the chimney, but Ibelieve he intended to refer me to Liverpool; "and then in the Cityof London here.  However, having an infirmity--for I am hard ofhearing, sir--"

I expressed in pantomime the greatest astonishment.

"--Yes, hard of hearing; having that infirmity coming upon me, myson he went into the Law, and he took charge of me, and he bylittle and little made out this elegant and beautiful property.  Butreturning to what you said, you know," pursued the old man, againlaughing heartily, "what I say is, No to be sure; you're right."

I was modestly wondering whether my utmost ingenuity would haveenabled me to say anything that would have amused him half as muchas this imaginary pleasantry, when I was startled by a sudden clickin the wall on one side of the chimney, and the ghostly tumblingopen of a little wooden flap with "JOHN" upon it.  The old man,following my eyes, cried with great triumph, "My son's come home!"and we both went out to the drawbridge.

It was worth any money to see Wemmick waving a salute to me fromthe other side of the moat, when we might have shaken hands acrossit with the greatest ease.  The Aged was so delighted to work thedrawbridge, that I made no offer to assist him, but stood quietuntil Wemmick had come across, and had presented me to MissSkiffins; a lady by whom he was accompanied.

Miss Skiffins was of a wooden appearance, and was, like her escort,in the post-office branch of the service.  She might have been sometwo or three years younger than Wemmick, and I judged her to standpossessed of portable property.  The cut of her dress from the waistupward, both before and behind, made her figure very like a boy'skite; and I might have pronounced her gown a little too decidedlyorange, and her gloves a little too intensely green.  But she seemedto be a good sort of fellow, and showed a high regard for the Aged.I was not long in discovering that she was a frequent visitor atthe Castle; for, on our going in, and my complimenting Wemmick onhis ingenious contrivance for announcing himself to the Aged, hebegged me to give my attention for a moment to the other side ofthe chimney, and disappeared.  Presently another click came, andanother little door tumbled open with "Miss Skiffins" on it; thenMiss Skiffins shut up and John tumbled open; then Miss Skiffins andJohn both tumbled open together, and finally shut up together.  OnWemmick's return from working these mechanical appliances, Iexpressed the great admiration with which I regarded them, and hesaid, "Well, you know, they're both pleasant and useful to theAged.  And by George, sir, it's a thing worth mentioning, that ofall the people who come to this gate, the secret of those pulls isonly known to the Aged, Miss Skiffins, and me!"

"And Mr. Wemmick made them," added Miss Skiffins, "with his ownhands out of his own head."

While Miss Skiffins was taking off her bonnet (she retained hergreen gloves during the evening as an outward and visible sign thatthere was company), Wemmick invited me to take a walk with himround the property, and see how the island looked in wintertime.Thinking that he did this to give me an opportunity of taking hisWalworth sentiments, I seized the opportunity as soon as we wereout of the Castle.

Having thought of the matter with care, I approached my subject asif I had never hinted at it before.  I informed Wemmick that I wasanxious in behalf of Herbert Pocket, and I told him how we hadfirst met, and how we had fought.  I glanced at Herbert's home, andat his character, and at his having no means but such as he wasdependent on his father for; those, uncertain and unpunctual.I alluded to the advantages I had derived in my first rawness andignorance from his society, and I confessed that I feared I had butill repaid them, and that he might have done better without me andmy expectations.  Keeping Miss Havisham in the background at a greatdistance, I still hinted at the possibility of my having competedwith him in his prospects, and at the certainty of his possessing agenerous soul, and being far above any mean distrusts,retaliations, or designs.  For all these reasons (I told Wemmick),and because he was my young companion and friend, and I had a greataffection for him, I wished my own good fortune to reflect somerays upon him, and therefore I sought advice from Wemmick'sexperience and knowledge of men and affairs, how I could best trywith my resources to help Herbert to some present income,--say of ahundred a year, to keep him in good hope and heart,--and graduallyto buy him on to some small partnership.  I begged Wemmick, inconclusion, to understand that my help must always be renderedwithout Herbert's knowledge or suspicion, and that there was no oneelse in the world with whom I could advise.  I wound up by laying myhand upon his shoulder, and saying, "I can't help confiding in you,though I know it must be troublesome to you; but that is yourfault, in having ever brought me here."

Wemmick was silent for a little while, and then said with a kind ofstart, "Well you know, Mr. Pip, I must tell you one thing.  This isdevilish good of you."

"Say you'll help me to be good then," said I.

"Ecod," replied Wemmick, shaking his head, "that's not my trade."

"Nor is this your trading-place," said I.

"You are right," he returned.  "You hit the nail on the head.  Mr.Pip, I'll put on my considering-cap, and I think all you want todo may be done by degrees.  Skiffins (that's her brother) is anaccountant and agent.  I'll look him up and go to work for you."

"I thank you ten thousand times."

"On the contrary," said he, "I thank you, for though we arestrictly in our private and personal capacity, still it may bementioned that there are Newgate cobwebs about, and it brushes themaway."

After a little further conversation to the same effect, we returnedinto the Castle where we found Miss Skiffins preparing tea.  Theresponsible duty of making the toast was delegated to the Aged, andthat excellent old gentleman was so intent upon it that he seemedto me in some danger of melting his eyes.  It was no nominal mealthat we were going to make, but a vigorous reality.  The Agedprepared such a hay-stack of buttered toast, that I could scarcelysee him over it as it simmered on an iron stand hooked on to thetop-bar; while Miss Skiffins brewed such a jorum of tea, that thepig in the back premises became strongly excited, and repeatedlyexpressed his desire to participate in the entertainment.

The flag had been struck, and the gun had been fired, at the rightmoment of time, and I felt as snugly cut off from the rest ofWalworth as if the moat were thirty feet wide by as many deep.Nothing disturbed the tranquillity of the Castle, but theoccasional tumbling open of John and Miss Skiffins:  which littledoors were a prey to some spasmodic infirmity that made mesympathetically uncomfortable until I got used to it.  I inferredfrom the methodical nature of Miss Skiffins's arrangements that shemade tea there every Sunday night; and I rather suspected that aclassic brooch she wore, representing the profile of an undesirablefemale with a very straight nose and a very new moon, was a pieceof portable property that had been given her by Wemmick.

We ate the whole of the toast, and drank tea in proportion, and itwas delightful to see how warm and greasy we all got after it.  TheAged especially, might have passed for some clean old chief of asavage tribe, just oiled.  After a short pause of repose, MissSkiffins--in the absence of the little servant who, it seemed,retired to the bosom of her family on Sunday afternoons--washed upthe tea-things, in a trifling lady-like amateur manner thatcompromised none of us.  Then, she put on her gloves again, and wedrew round the fire, and Wemmick said, "Now, Aged Parent, tip us thepaper."

Wemmick explained to me while the Aged got his spectacles out, thatthis was according to custom, and that it gave the old gentlemaninfinite satisfaction to read the news aloud.  "I won't offer anapology," said Wemmick, "for he isn't capable of many pleasures--are you, Aged P.?"

"All right, John, all right," returned the old man, seeing himselfspoken to.

"Only tip him a nod every now and then when he looks off hispaper," said Wemmick, "and he'll be as happy as a king.  We are allattention, Aged One."

"All right, John, all right!" returned the cheerful old man, sobusy and so pleased, that it really was quite charming.

The Aged's reading reminded me of the classes at Mr. Wopsle'sgreat-aunt's, with the pleasanter peculiarity that it seemed tocome through a keyhole.  As he wanted the candles close to him, andas he was always on the verge of putting either his head or thenewspaper into them, he required as much watching as a powder-mill.But Wemmick was equally untiring and gentle in his vigilance, andthe Aged read on, quite unconscious of his many rescues.  Wheneverhe looked at us, we all expressed the greatest interest andamazement, and nodded until he resumed again.

As Wemmick and Miss Skiffins sat side by side, and as I sat in ashadowy corner, I observed a slow and gradual elongation of Mr.Wemmick's mouth, powerfully suggestive of his slowly and graduallystealing his arm round Miss Skiffins's waist.  In course of time Isaw his hand appear on the other side of Miss Skiffins; but at thatmoment Miss Skiffins neatly stopped him with the green glove,unwound his arm again as if it were an article of dress, and withthe greatest deliberation laid it on the table before her.  MissSkiffins's composure while she did this was one of the mostremarkable sights I have ever seen, and if I could have thought theact consistent with abstraction of mind, I should have deemed thatMiss Skiffins performed it mechanically.

By and by, I noticed Wemmick's arm beginning to disappear again,and gradually fading out of view.  Shortly afterwards, his mouthbegan to widen again.  After an interval of suspense on my part thatwas quite enthralling and almost painful, I saw his hand appear onthe other side of Miss Skiffins.  Instantly, Miss Skiffins stoppedit with the neatness of a placid boxer, took off that girdle orcestus as before, and laid it on the table.  Taking the table torepresent the path of virtue, I am justified in stating that duringthe whole time of the Aged's reading, Wemmick's arm was strayingfrom the path of virtue and being recalled to it by Miss Skiffins.

At last, the Aged read himself into a light slumber.  This was thetime for Wemmick to produce a little kettle, a tray of glasses, anda black bottle with a porcelain-topped cork, representing someclerical dignitary of a rubicund and social aspect.  With the aid ofthese appliances we all had something warm to drink, including theAged, who was soon awake again.  Miss Skiffins mixed, and I observedthat she and Wemmick drank out of one glass.  Of course I knewbetter than to offer to see Miss Skiffins home, and under thecircumstances I thought I had best go first; which I did, taking acordial leave of the Aged, and having passed a pleasant evening.

Before a week was out, I received a note from Wemmick, datedWalworth, stating that he hoped he had made some advance in thatmatter appertaining to our private and personal capacities, andthat he would be glad if I could come and see him again upon it.So, I went out to Walworth again, and yet again, and yet again, andI saw him by appointment in the City several times, but never heldany communication with him on the subject in or near LittleBritain.  The upshot was, that we found a worthy young merchant orshipping-broker, not long established in business, who wantedintelligent help, and who wanted capital, and who in due course oftime and receipt would want a partner.  Between him and me, secretarticles were signed of which Herbert was the subject, and I paidhim half of my five hundred pounds down, and engaged for sundryother payments:  some, to fall due at certain dates out of myincome:  some, contingent on my coming into my property.  MissSkiffins's brother conducted the negotiation.  Wemmick pervaded itthroughout, but never appeared in it.

The whole business was so cleverly managed, that Herbert had notthe least suspicion of my hand being in it.  I never shall forgetthe radiant face with which he came home one afternoon, and toldme, as a mighty piece of news, of his having fallen in with oneClarriker (the young merchant's name), and of Clarriker's havingshown an extraordinary inclination towards him, and of his beliefthat the opening had come at last.  Day by day as his hopes grewstronger and his face brighter, he must have thought me a more andmore affectionate friend, for I had the greatest difficulty inrestraining my tears of triumph when I saw him so happy.  At length,the thing being done, and he having that day entered Clarriker'sHouse, and he having talked to me for a whole evening in a flush ofpleasure and success, I did really cry in good earnest when I wentto bed, to think that my expectations had done some good tosomebody.

A great event in my life, the turning point of my life, now openson my view.  But, before I proceed to narrate it, and before I passon to all the changes it involved, I must give one chapter toEstella.  It is not much to give to the theme that so long filledmy heart.

Chapter XXXVIII

If that staid old house near the Green at Richmond should ever cometo be haunted when I am dead, it will be haunted, surely, by myghost.  O the many, many nights and days through which the unquietspirit within me haunted that house when Estella lived there!  Letmy body be where it would, my spirit was always wandering,wandering, wandering, about that house.

The lady with whom Estella was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name, was awidow, with one daughter several years older than Estella.  Themother looked young, and the daughter looked old; the mother'scomplexion was pink, and the daughter's was yellow; the mother setup for frivolity, and the daughter for theology.  They were in whatis called a good position, and visited, and were visited by,numbers of people.  Little, if any, community of feeling subsistedbetween them and Estella, but the understanding was establishedthat they were necessary to her, and that she was necessary tothem.  Mrs. Brandley had been a friend of Miss Havisham's before thetime of her seclusion.

In Mrs. Brandley's house and out of Mrs. Brandley's house, I sufferedevery kind and degree of torture that Estella could cause me.  Thenature of my relations with her, which placed me on terms offamiliarity without placing me on terms of favor, conduced to mydistraction.  She made use of me to tease other admirers, and sheturned the very familiarity between herself and me to the accountof putting a constant slight on my devotion to her.  If I had beenher secretary, steward, half-brother, poor relation,--if I had beena younger brother of her appointed husband,--I could not haveseemed to myself further from my hopes when I was nearest to her.The privilege of calling her by her name and hearing her call me bymine became, under the circumstances an aggravation of my trials;and while I think it likely that it almost maddened her otherlovers, I know too certainly that it almost maddened me.

She had admirers without end.  No doubt my jealousy made an admirerof every one who went near her; but there were more than enough ofthem without that.

I saw her often at Richmond, I heard of her often in town, and Iused often to take her and the Brandleys on the water; there werepicnics, fte days, plays, operas, concerts, parties, all sorts ofpleasures, through which I pursued her,--and they were all miseriesto me.  I never had one hour's happiness in her society, and yet mymind all round the four-and-twenty hours was harping on thehappiness of having her with me unto death.

Throughout this part of our intercourse,--and it lasted, as willpresently be seen, for what I then thought a long time,--shehabitually reverted to that tone which expressed that ourassociation was forced upon us.  There were other times when shewould come to a sudden check in this tone and in all her manytones, and would seem to pity me.

"Pip, Pip," she said one evening, coming to such a check, when wesat apart at a darkening window of the house in Richmond; "will younever take warning?"

"Of what?"

"Of me."

"Warning not to be attracted by you, do you mean, Estella?"

"Do I mean!  If you don't know what I mean, you are blind."

I should have replied that Love was commonly reputed blind, but forthe reason that I always was restrained--and this was not theleast of my miseries--by a feeling that it was ungenerous to pressmyself upon her, when she knew that she could not choose but obeyMiss Havisham.  My dread always was, that this knowledge on her partlaid me under a heavy disadvantage with her pride, and made me thesubject of a rebellious struggle in her bosom.

"At any rate," said I, "I have no warning given me just now, foryou wrote to me to come to you, this time."

"That's true," said Estella, with a cold careless smile that alwayschilled me.

After looking at the twilight without, for a little while, she wenton to say:--

"The time has come round when Miss Havisham wishes to have me for aday at Satis.  You are to take me there, and bring me back, if youwill.  She would rather I did not travel alone, and objects toreceiving my maid, for she has a sensitive horror of being talkedof by such people.  Can you take me?"

"Can I take you, Estella!"

"You can then?  The day after to-morrow, if you please.  You are topay all charges out of my purse, You hear the condition of yourgoing?"

"And must obey," said I.

This was all the preparation I received for that visit, or forothers like it; Miss Havisham never wrote to me, nor had I ever somuch as seen her handwriting.  We went down on the next day but one,and we found her in the room where I had first beheld her, and itis needless to add that there was no change in Satis House.

She was even more dreadfully fond of Estella than she had been whenI last saw them together; I repeat the word advisedly, for therewas something positively dreadful in the energy of her looks andembraces.  She hung upon Estella's beauty, hung upon her words, hungupon her gestures, and sat mumbling her own trembling fingers whileshe looked at her, as though she were devouring the beautifulcreature she had reared.

From Estella she looked at me, with a searching glance that seemedto pry into my heart and probe its wounds.  "How does she use you,Pip; how does she use you?" she asked me again, with her witch-likeeagerness, even in Estella's hearing.  But, when we sat by herflickering fire at night, she was most weird; for then, keepingEstella's hand drawn through her arm and clutched in her own hand,she extorted from her, by dint of referring back to what Estellahad told her in her regular letters, the names and conditions ofthe men whom she had fascinated; and as Miss Havisham dwelt uponthis roll, with the intensity of a mind mortally hurt and diseased,she sat with her other hand on her crutch stick, and her chin onthat, and her wan bright eyes glaring at me, a very spectre.

I saw in this, wretched though it made me, and bitter the sense ofdependence and even of degradation that it awakened,--I saw inthis that Estella was set to wreak Miss Havisham's revenge on men,and that she was not to be given to me until she had gratified itfor a term.  I saw in this, a reason for her being beforehandassigned to me.  Sending her out to attract and torment and domischief, Miss Havisham sent her with the malicious assurance thatshe was beyond the reach of all admirers, and that all who stakedupon that cast were secured to lose.  I saw in this that I, too,was tormented by a perversion of ingenuity, even while the prizewas reserved for me.  I saw in this the reason for my being stavedoff so long and the reason for my late guardian's declining tocommit himself to the formal knowledge of such a scheme.  In a word,I saw in this Miss Havisham as I had her then and there before myeyes, and always had had her before my eyes; and I saw in this, thedistinct shadow of the darkened and unhealthy house in which herlife was hidden from the sun.

The candles that lighted that room of hers were placed in sconceson the wall.  They were high from the ground, and they burnt withthe steady dulness of artificial light in air that is seldomrenewed.  As I looked round at them, and at the pale gloom theymade, and at the stopped clock, and at the withered articles ofbridal dress upon the table and the ground, and at her own awfulfigure with its ghostly reflection thrown large by the fire uponthe ceiling and the wall, I saw in everything the construction thatmy mind had come to, repeated and thrown back to me.  My thoughtspassed into the great room across the landing where the table wasspread, and I saw it written, as it were, in the falls of thecobwebs from the centre-piece, in the crawlings of the spiders onthe cloth, in the tracks of the mice as they betook their littlequickened hearts behind the panels, and in the gropings andpausings of the beetles on the floor.

It happened on the occasion of this visit that some sharp wordsarose between Estella and Miss Havisham.  It was the first time Ihad ever seen them opposed.

We were seated by the fire, as just now described, and MissHavisham still had Estella's arm drawn through her own, and stillclutched Estella's hand in hers, when Estella gradually began todetach herself.  She had shown a proud impatience more than oncebefore, and had rather endured that fierce affection than acceptedor returned it.

"What!" said Miss Havisham, flashing her eyes upon her, "are youtired of me?"

"Only a little tired of myself," replied Estella, disengaging herarm, and moving to the great chimney-piece, where she stood lookingdown at the fire.

"Speak the truth, you ingrate!" cried Miss Havisham, passionatelystriking her stick upon the floor; "you are tired of me."

Estella looked at her with perfect composure, and again looked downat the fire.  Her graceful figure and her beautiful face expressed aself-possessed indifference to the wild heat of the other, that wasalmost cruel.

"You stock and stone!" exclaimed Miss Havisham.  "You cold, coldheart!"

"What?" said Estella, preserving her attitude of indifference asshe leaned against the great chimney-piece and only moving hereyes; "do you reproach me for being cold?  You?"

"Are you not?" was the fierce retort.

"You should know," said Estella.  "I am what you have made me.  Takeall the praise, take all the blame; take all the success, take allthe failure; in short, take me."

"O, look at her, look at her!" cried Miss Havisham, bitterly; "Lookat her so hard and thankless, on the hearth where she was reared!Where I took her into this wretched breast when it was firstbleeding from its stabs, and where I have lavished years oftenderness upon her!"

"At least I was no party to the compact," said Estella, "for if Icould walk and speak, when it was made, it was as much as I coulddo.  But what would you have?  You have been very good to me, and Iowe everything to you.  What would you have?"

"Love," replied the other.

"You have it."

"I have not," said Miss Havisham.

"Mother by adoption," retorted Estella, never departing from theeasy grace of her attitude, never raising her voice as the otherdid, never yielding either to anger or tenderness,--"mother byadoption, I have said that I owe everything to you.  All I possessis freely yours.  All that you have given me, is at your command tohave again.  Beyond that, I have nothing.  And if you ask me to giveyou, what you never gave me, my gratitude and duty cannot doimpossibilities."

"Did I never give her love!" cried Miss Havisham, turning wildly tome.  "Did I never give her a burning love, inseparable from jealousyat all times, and from sharp pain, while she speaks thus to me!  Lether call me mad, let her call me mad!"

"Why should I call you mad," returned Estella, "I, of all people?Does any one live, who knows what set purposes you have, half aswell as I do?  Does any one live, who knows what a steady memory youhave, half as well as I do?  I who have sat on this same hearth onthe little stool that is even now beside you there, learning yourlessons and looking up into your face, when your face was strangeand frightened me!"

"Soon forgotten!" moaned Miss Havisham.  "Times soon forgotten!"

"No, not forgotten," retorted Estella,--"not forgotten, buttreasured up in my memory.  When have you found me false to yourteaching?  When have you found me unmindful of your lessons?  Whenhave you found me giving admission here," she touched her bosomwith her hand, "to anything that you excluded?  Be just to me."

"So proud, so proud!" moaned Miss Havisham, pushing away her grayhair with both her hands.

"Who taught me to be proud?" returned Estella.  "Who praised me whenI learnt my lesson?"

"So hard, so hard!" moaned Miss Havisham, with her former action.

"Who taught me to be hard?" returned Estella.  "Who praised me whenI learnt my lesson?"

"But to be proud and hard to me!" Miss Havisham quite shrieked, asshe stretched out her arms.  "Estella, Estella, Estella, to be proudand hard to me!"

Estella looked at her for a moment with a kind of calm wonder, butwas not otherwise disturbed; when the moment was past, she lookeddown at the fire again.

"I cannot think," said Estella, raising her eyes after a silence"why you should be so unreasonable when I come to see you after aseparation.  I have never forgotten your wrongs and their causes.  Ihave never been unfaithful to you or your schooling.  I have nevershown any weakness that I can charge myself with."

"Would it be weakness to return my love?" exclaimed Miss Havisham."But yes, yes, she would call it so!"

"I begin to think," said Estella, in a musing way, after anothermoment of calm wonder, "that I almost understand how this comesabout.  If you had brought up your adopted daughter wholly in thedark confinement of these rooms, and had never let her know thatthere was such a thing as the daylight by which she had never onceseen your face,--if you had done that, and then, for a purpose hadwanted her to understand the daylight and know all about it, youwould have been disappointed and angry?"

Miss Havisham, with her head in her hands, sat making a lowmoaning, and swaying herself on her chair, but gave no answer.

"Or," said Estella,--"which is a nearer case,--if you had taughther, from the dawn of her intelligence, with your utmost energy andmight, that there was such a thing as daylight, but that it wasmade to be her enemy and destroyer, and she must always turnagainst it, for it had blighted you and would else blight her;--ifyou had done this, and then, for a purpose, had wanted her to takenaturally to the daylight and she could not do it, you would havebeen disappointed and angry?"

Miss Havisham sat listening (or it seemed so, for I could not seeher face), but still made no answer.

"So," said Estella, "I must be taken as I have been made.  Thesuccess is not mine, the failure is not mine, but the two togethermake me."

Miss Havisham had settled down, I hardly knew how, upon the floor,among the faded bridal relics with which it was strewn.  I tookadvantage of the moment--I had sought one from the first--toleave the room, after beseeching Estella's attention to her, with amovement of my hand.  When I left, Estella was yet standing by thegreat chimney-piece, just as she had stood throughout.  MissHavisham's gray hair was all adrift upon the ground, among theother bridal wrecks, and was a miserable sight to see.

It was with a depressed heart that I walked in the starlight for anhour and more, about the courtyard, and about the brewery, andabout the ruined garden.  When I at last took courage to return tothe room, I found Estella sitting at Miss Havisham's knee, takingup some stitches in one of those old articles of dress that weredropping to pieces, and of which I have often been reminded sinceby the faded tatters of old banners that I have seen hanging up incathedrals.  Afterwards, Estella and I played at cards, as of yore,--only we were skilful now, and played French games,--and so theevening wore away, and I went to bed.

I lay in that separate building across the courtyard.  It was thefirst time I had ever lain down to rest in Satis House, and sleeprefused to come near me.  A thousand Miss Havishams haunted me.  Shewas on this side of my pillow, on that, at the head of the bed, atthe foot, behind the half-opened door of the dressing-room, in thedressing-room, in the room overhead, in the room beneath,--everywhere.  At last, when the night was slow to creep on towardstwo o'clock, I felt that I absolutely could no longer bear theplace as a place to lie down in, and that I must get up.  Itherefore got up and put on my clothes, and went out across theyard into the long stone passage, designing to gain the outercourtyard and walk there for the relief of my mind.  But I was nosooner in the passage than I extinguished my candle; for I sawMiss Havisham going along it in a ghostly manner, making a low cry.I followed her at a distance, and saw her go up the staircase.  Shecarried a bare candle in her hand, which she had probably takenfrom one of the sconces in her own room, and was a most unearthlyobject by its light.  Standing at the bottom of the staircase, Ifelt the mildewed air of the feast-chamber, without seeing her openthe door, and I heard her walking there, and so across into her ownroom, and so across again into that, never ceasing the low cry.After a time, I tried in the dark both to get out, and to go back,but I could do neither until some streaks of day strayed in andshowed me where to lay my hands.  During the whole interval,whenever I went to the bottom of the staircase, I heard herfootstep, saw her light pass above, and heard her ceaseless lowcry.

Before we left next day, there was no revival of the differencebetween her and Estella, nor was it ever revived on any similaroccasion; and there were four similar occasions, to the best of myremembrance.  Nor, did Miss Havisham's manner towards Estella inanywise change, except that I believed it to have something likefear infused among its former characteristics.

It is impossible to turn this leaf of my life, without puttingBentley Drummle's name upon it; or I would, very gladly.

On a certain occasion when the Finches were assembled in force, andwhen good feeling was being promoted in the usual manner bynobody's agreeing with anybody else, the presiding Finch called theGrove to order, forasmuch as Mr. Drummle had not yet toasted a lady;which, according to the solemn constitution of the society, it wasthe brute's turn to do that day.  I thought I saw him leer in anugly way at me while the decanters were going round, but as therewas no love lost between us, that might easily be.  What was myindignant surprise when he called upon the company to pledge him to"Estella!"

"Estella who?" said I.

"Never you mind," retorted Drummle.

"Estella of where?" said I.  "You are bound to say of where."  Whichhe was, as a Finch.

"Of Richmond, gentlemen," said Drummle, putting me out of thequestion, "and a peerless beauty."

Much he knew about peerless beauties, a mean, miserable idiot!  Iwhispered Herbert.

"I know that lady," said Herbert, across the table, when the toasthad been honored.

"Do you?" said Drummle.

"And so do I," I added, with a scarlet face.

"Do you?" said Drummle.  "O, Lord!"

This was the only retort--except glass or crockery--that theheavy creature was capable of making; but, I became as highlyincensed by it as if it had been barbed with wit, and I immediatelyrose in my place and said that I could not but regard it as beinglike the honorable Finch's impudence to come down to that Grove,--we always talked about coming down to that Grove, as a neatParliamentary turn of expression,--down to that Grove, proposing alady of whom he knew nothing.  Mr. Drummle, upon this, starting up,demanded what I meant by that?  Whereupon I made him the extremereply that I believed he knew where I was to be found.

Whether it was possible in a Christian country to get on withoutblood, after this, was a question on which the Finches weredivided.  The debate upon it grew so lively, indeed, that at leastsix more honorable members told six more, during the discussion,that they believed they knew where they were to be found.  However,it was decided at last (the Grove being a Court of Honor) that ifMr. Drummle would bring never so slight a certificate from the lady,importing that he had the honor of her acquaintance, Mr. Pip mustexpress his regret, as a gentleman and a Finch, for "having beenbetrayed into a warmth which."  Next day was appointed for theproduction (lest our honor should take cold from delay), and nextday Drummle appeared with a polite little avowal in Estella's hand,that she had had the honor of dancing with him several times.  Thisleft me no course but to regret that I had been "betrayed into awarmth which," and on the whole to repudiate, as untenable, theidea that I was to be found anywhere.  Drummle and I then satsnorting at one another for an hour, while the Grove engaged inindiscriminate contradiction, and finally the promotion of goodfeeling was declared to have gone ahead at an amazing rate.

I tell this lightly, but it was no light thing to me.  For, I cannotadequately express what pain it gave me to think that Estellashould show any favor to a contemptible, clumsy, sulky booby, sovery far below the average.  To the present moment, I believe it tohave been referable to some pure fire of generosity anddisinterestedness in my love for her, that I could not endure thethought of her stooping to that hound.  No doubt I should have beenmiserable whomsoever she had favored; but a worthier object wouldhave caused me a different kind and degree of distress.

It was easy for me to find out, and I did soon find out, thatDrummle had begun to follow her closely, and that she allowed himto do it.  A little while, and he was always in pursuit of her, andhe and I crossed one another every day.  He held on, in a dullpersistent way, and Estella held him on; now with encouragement,now with discouragement, now almost flattering him, now openlydespising him, now knowing him very well, now scarcely rememberingwho he was.

The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him, was used to lying inwait, however, and had the patience of his tribe.  Added to that, hehad a blockhead confidence in his money and in his familygreatness, which sometimes did him good service,--almost taking theplace of concentration and determined purpose.  So, the Spider,doggedly watching Estella, outwatched many brighter insects, andwould often uncoil himself and drop at the right nick of time.

At a certain Assembly Ball at Richmond (there used to be AssemblyBalls at most places then), where Estella had outshone all otherbeauties, this blundering Drummle so hung about her, and with somuch toleration on her part, that I resolved to speak to herconcerning him.  I took the next opportunity; which was when she waswaiting for Mrs. Blandley to take her home, and was sitting apartamong some flowers, ready to go.  I was with her, for I almostalways accompanied them to and from such places.

"Are you tired, Estella?"

"Rather, Pip."

"You should be."

"Say rather, I should not be; for I have my letter to Satis Houseto write, before I go to sleep."

"Recounting to-night's triumph?" said I.  "Surely a very poor one,Estella."

"What do you mean?  I didn't know there had been any."

"Estella," said I, "do look at that fellow in the corner yonder,who is looking over here at us."

"Why should I look at him?" returned Estella, with her eyes on meinstead.  "What is there in that fellow in the corner yonder,--touse your words,--that I need look at?"

"Indeed, that is the very question I want to ask you," said I.  "Forhe has been hovering about you all night."

"Moths, and all sorts of ugly creatures," replied Estella, with aglance towards him, "hover about a lighted candle.  Can the candlehelp it?"

"No," I returned; "but cannot the Estella help it?"

"Well!" said she, laughing, after a moment, "perhaps.  Yes.  Anythingyou like."

"But, Estella, do hear me speak.  It makes me wretched that youshould encourage a man so generally despised as Drummle.  You knowhe is despised."

"Well?" said she.

"You know he is as ungainly within as without.  A deficient,ill-tempered, lowering, stupid fellow."

"Well?" said she.

"You know he has nothing to recommend him but money and aridiculous roll of addle-headed predecessors; now, don't you?"

"Well?" said she again; and each time she said it, she opened herlovely eyes the wider.

To overcome the difficulty of getting past that monosyllable, Itook it from her, and said, repeating it with emphasis, "Well!  Then,that is why it makes me wretched."

Now, if I could have believed that she favored Drummle with anyidea of making me-me--wretched, I should have been in betterheart about it; but in that habitual way of hers, she put me soentirely out of the question, that I could believe nothing of thekind.

"Pip," said Estella, casting her glance over the room, "don't befoolish about its effect on you.  It may have its effect on others,and may be meant to have.  It's not worth discussing."

"Yes it is," said I, "because I cannot bear that people should say,'she throws away her graces and attractions on a mere boor, thelowest in the crowd.'"

"I can bear it," said Estella.

"Oh! don't be so proud, Estella, and so inflexible."

"Calls me proud and inflexible in this breath!" said Estella,opening her hands.  "And in his last breath reproached me forstooping to a boor!"

"There is no doubt you do," said I, something hurriedly, "for Ihave seen you give him looks and smiles this very night, such asyou never give to--me."

"Do you want me then," said Estella, turning suddenly with a fixedand serious, if not angry, look, "to deceive and entrap you?"

"Do you deceive and entrap him, Estella?"

"Yes, and many others,--all of them but you.  Here is Mrs. Brandley.I'll say no more."

And now that I have given the one chapter to the theme that sofilled my heart, and so often made it ache and ache again, I passon unhindered, to the event that had impended over me longer yet;the event that had begun to be prepared for, before I knew that theworld held Estella, and in the days when her baby intelligence wasreceiving its first distortions from Miss Havisham's wasting hands.

In the Eastern story, the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed ofstate in the flush of conquest was slowly wrought out of thequarry, the tunnel for the rope to hold it in its place was slowlycarried through the leagues of rock, the slab was slowly raised andfitted in the roof, the rope was rove to it and slowly takenthrough the miles of hollow to the great iron ring.  All being madeready with much labor, and the hour come, the sultan was arousedin the dead of the night, and the sharpened axe that was to severthe rope from the great iron ring was put into his hand, and hestruck with it, and the rope parted and rushed away, and theceiling fell.  So, in my case; all the work, near and afar, thattended to the end, had been accomplished; and in an instant theblow was struck, and the roof of my stronghold dropped upon me.

Chapter XXXIX

I was three-and-twenty years of age.  Not another word had I heardto enlighten me on the subject of my expectations, and mytwenty-third birthday was a week gone.  We had left Barnard's Innmore than a year, and lived in the Temple.  Our chambers were inGarden-court, down by the river.

Mr. Pocket and I had for some time parted company as to our originalrelations, though we continued on the best terms.  Notwithstanding myinability to settle to anything,--which I hope arose out of therestless and incomplete tenure on which I held my means,--I had ataste for reading, and read regularly so many hours a day.  Thatmatter of Herbert's was still progressing, and everything with mewas as I have brought it down to the close of the last precedingchapter.

Business had taken Herbert on a journey to Marseilles.  I was alone,and had a dull sense of being alone.  Dispirited and anxious, longhoping that to-morrow or next week would clear my way, and longdisappointed, I sadly missed the cheerful face and ready responseof my friend.

It was wretched weather; stormy and wet, stormy and wet; and mud,mud, mud, deep in all the streets.  Day after day, a vast heavy veilhad been driving over London from the East, and it drove still, asif in the East there were an Eternity of cloud and wind.  So furioushad been the gusts, that high buildings in town had had the leadstripped off their roofs; and in the country, trees had been tornup, and sails of windmills carried away; and gloomy accounts hadcome in from the coast, of shipwreck and death.  Violent blasts ofrain had accompanied these rages of wind, and the day just closedas I sat down to read had been the worst of all.

Alterations have been made in that part of the Temple since thattime, and it has not now so lonely a character as it had then, noris it so exposed to the river.  We lived at the top of the lasthouse, and the wind rushing up the river shook the house thatnight, like discharges of cannon, or breakings of a sea.  When therain came with it and dashed against the windows, I thought,raising my eyes to them as they rocked, that I might have fanciedmyself in a storm-beaten lighthouse.  Occasionally, the smoke camerolling down the chimney as though it could not bear to go out intosuch a night; and when I set the doors open and looked down thestaircase, the staircase lamps were blown out; and when I shaded myface with my hands and looked through the black windows (openingthem ever so little was out of the question in the teeth of suchwind and rain), I saw that the lamps in the court were blown out,and that the lamps on the bridges and the shore were shuddering,and that the coal-fires in barges on the river were being carriedaway before the wind like red-hot splashes in the rain.

I read with my watch upon the table, purposing to close my book ateleven o'clock.  As I shut it, Saint Paul's, and all the manychurch-clocks in the City--some leading, some accompanying, somefollowing--struck that hour.  The sound was curiously flawed by thewind; and I was listening, and thinking how the wind assailed andtore it, when I heard a footstep on the stair.

What nervous folly made me start, and awfully connect it with thefootstep of my dead sister, matters not.  It was past in a moment,and I listened again, and heard the footstep stumble in coming on.Remembering then, that the staircase-lights were blown out, I tookup my reading-lamp and went out to the stair-head.  Whoever wasbelow had stopped on seeing my lamp, for all was quiet.

"There is some one down there, is there not?" I called out, lookingdown.

"Yes," said a voice from the darkness beneath.

"What floor do you want?"

"The top.  Mr. Pip."

"That is my name.--There is nothing the matter?"

"Nothing the matter," returned the voice.  And the man came on.

I stood with my lamp held out over the stair-rail, and he cameslowly within its light.  It was a shaded lamp, to shine upon abook, and its circle of light was very contracted; so that he wasin it for a mere instant, and then out of it.  In the instant, I hadseen a face that was strange to me, looking up with anincomprehensible air of being touched and pleased by the sight ofme.

Moving the lamp as the man moved, I made out that he wassubstantially dressed, but roughly, like a voyager by sea.  That hehad long iron-gray hair.  That his age was about sixty.  That he wasa muscular man, strong on his legs, and that he was browned andhardened by exposure to weather.  As he ascended the last stair ortwo, and the light of my lamp included us both, I saw, with astupid kind of amazement, that he was holding out both his hands tome.

"Pray what is your business?" I asked him.

"My business?" he repeated, pausing.  "Ah!  Yes.  I will explain mybusiness, by your leave."

"Do you wish to come in?"

"Yes," he replied; "I wish to come in, master."

I had asked him the question inhospitably enough, for I resentedthe sort of bright and gratified recognition that still shone inhis face.  I resented it, because it seemed to imply that heexpected me to respond to it.  But I took him into the room I hadjust left, and, having set the lamp on the table, asked him ascivilly as I could to explain himself.

He looked about him with the strangest air,--an air of wonderingpleasure, as if he had some part in the things he admired,--and hepulled off a rough outer coat, and his hat.  Then, I saw that hishead was furrowed and bald, and that the long iron-gray hair grewonly on its sides.  But, I saw nothing that in the least explainedhim.  On the contrary, I saw him next moment, once more holding outboth his hands to me.

"What do you mean?" said I, half suspecting him to be mad.

He stopped in his looking at me, and slowly rubbed his right handover his head.  "It's disapinting to a man," he said, in a coarsebroken voice, "arter having looked for'ard so distant, and come sofur; but you're not to blame for that,--neither on us is to blamefor that.  I'll speak in half a minute.  Give me half a minute,please."

He sat down on a chair that stood before the fire, and covered hisforehead with his large brown veinous hands.  I looked at himattentively then, and recoiled a little from him; but I did notknow him.

"There's no one nigh," said he, looking over his shoulder; "isthere?"

"Why do you, a stranger coming into my rooms at this time of thenight, ask that question?" said I.

"You're a game one," he returned, shaking his head at me with adeliberate affection, at once most unintelligible and mostexasperating; "I'm glad you've grow'd up, a game one!  But don'tcatch hold of me.  You'd be sorry arterwards to have done it."

I relinquished the intention he had detected, for I knew him!  Evenyet I could not recall a single feature, but I knew him!  If thewind and the rain had driven away the intervening years, hadscattered all the intervening objects, had swept us to thechurchyard where we first stood face to face on such differentlevels, I could not have known my convict more distinctly than Iknew him now as he sat in the chair before the fire.  No need totake a file from his pocket and show it to me; no need to take thehandkerchief from his neck and twist it round his head; no need tohug himself with both his arms, and take a shivering turn acrossthe room, looking back at me for recognition.  I knew him before hegave me one of those aids, though, a moment before, I had not beenconscious of remotely suspecting his identity.

He came back to where I stood, and again held out both his hands.Not knowing what to do,--for, in my astonishment I had lost myself-possession,--I reluctantly gave him my hands.  He grasped themheartily, raised them to his lips, kissed them, and still heldthem.

"You acted noble, my boy," said he.  "Noble, Pip!  And I have neverforgot it!"

At a change in his manner as if he were even going to embrace me, Ilaid a hand upon his breast and put him away.

"Stay!" said I.  "Keep off!  If you are grateful to me for what I didwhen I was a little child, I hope you have shown your gratitude bymending your way of life.  If you have come here to thank me, it wasnot necessary.  Still, however you have found me out, there must besomething good in the feeling that has brought you here, and I willnot repulse you; but surely you must understand that--I--"

My attention was so attracted by the singularity of his fixed lookat me, that the words died away on my tongue.

"You was a saying," he observed, when we had confronted one anotherin silence, "that surely I must understand.  What, surely must Iunderstand?"

"That I cannot wish to renew that chance intercourse with you oflong ago, under these different circumstances.  I am glad to believeyou have repented and recovered yourself.  I am glad to tell you so.I am glad that, thinking I deserve to be thanked, you have come tothank me.  But our ways are different ways, none the less.  You arewet, and you look weary.  Will you drink something before you go?"

He had replaced his neckerchief loosely, and had stood, keenlyobservant of me, biting a long end of it.  "I think," he answered,still with the end at his mouth and still observant of me, "that Iwill drink (I thank you) afore I go."

There was a tray ready on a side-table.  I brought it to the tablenear the fire, and asked him what he would have?  He touched one ofthe bottles without looking at it or speaking, and I made him somehot rum and water.  I tried to keep my hand steady while I did so,but his look at me as he leaned back in his chair with the longdraggled end of his neckerchief between his teeth--evidentlyforgotten--made my hand very difficult to master.  When at last Iput the glass to him, I saw with amazement that his eyes were fullof tears.

Up to this time I had remained standing, not to disguise that Iwished him gone.  But I was softened by the softened aspect of theman, and felt a touch of reproach.  "I hope," said I, hurriedlyputting something into a glass for myself, and drawing a chair tothe table, "that you will not think I spoke harshly to you justnow.  I had no intention of doing it, and I am sorry for it if Idid.  I wish you well and happy!"

As I put my glass to my lips, he glanced with surprise at the endof his neckerchief, dropping from his mouth when he opened it, andstretched out his hand.  I gave him mine, and then he drank, anddrew his sleeve across his eyes and forehead.

"How are you living?" I asked him.

"I've been a sheep-farmer, stock-breeder, other trades besides,away in the new world," said he; "many a thousand mile of stormywater off from this."

"I hope you have done well?"

"I've done wonderfully well.  There's others went out alonger me ashas done well too, but no man has done nigh as well as me.  I'mfamous for it."

"I am glad to hear it."

"I hope to hear you say so, my dear boy."

Without stopping to try to understand those words or the tone inwhich they were spoken, I turned off to a point that had just comeinto my mind.

"Have you ever seen a messenger you once sent to me," I inquired,"since he undertook that trust?"

"Never set eyes upon him.  I warn't likely to it."

"He came faithfully, and he brought me the two one-pound notes.  Iwas a poor boy then, as you know, and to a poor boy they were alittle fortune.  But, like you, I have done well since, and you mustlet me pay them back.  You can put them to some other poor boy'suse."  I took out my purse.

He watched me as I laid my purse upon the table and opened it, andhe watched me as I separated two one-pound notes from its contents.They were clean and new, and I spread them out and handed them overto him.  Still watching me, he laid them one upon the other, foldedthem long-wise, gave them a twist, set fire to them at the lamp,and dropped the ashes into the tray.

"May I make so bold," he said then, with a smile that was like afrown, and with a frown that was like a smile, "as ask you how youhave done well, since you and me was out on them lone shiveringmarshes?"

"How?"

"Ah!"

He emptied his glass, got up, and stood at the side of the fire,with his heavy brown hand on the mantel-shelf.  He put a foot up tothe bars, to dry and warm it, and the wet boot began to steam; but,he neither looked at it, nor at the fire, but steadily looked atme.  It was only now that I began to tremble.

When my lips had parted, and had shaped some words that werewithout sound, I forced myself to tell him (though I could not doit distinctly), that I had been chosen to succeed to some property.

"Might a mere warmint ask what property?" said he.

I faltered, "I don't know."

"Might a mere warmint ask whose property?" said he.

I faltered again, "I don't know."

"Could I make a guess, I wonder," said the Convict, "at your incomesince you come of age!  As to the first figure now.  Five?"

With my heart beating like a heavy hammer of disordered action, Irose out of my chair, and stood with my hand upon the back of it,looking wildly at him.

"Concerning a guardian," he went on.  "There ought to have been someguardian, or such-like, whiles you was a minor.  Some lawyer, maybe.As to the first letter of that lawyer's name now.  Would it be J?"

All the truth of my position came flashing on me; and itsdisappointments, dangers, disgraces, consequences of all kinds,rushed in in such a multitude that I was borne down by them and hadto struggle for every breath I drew.

"Put it," he resumed, "as the employer of that lawyer whose namebegun with a J, and might be Jaggers,--put it as he had come oversea to Portsmouth, and had landed there, and had wanted to come onto you.  'However, you have found me out,' you says just now.  Well!However, did I find you out?  Why, I wrote from Portsmouth to aperson in London, for particulars of your address.  That person'sname?  Why, Wemmick."

I could not have spoken one word, though it had been to save mylife.  I stood, with a hand on the chair-back and a hand on mybreast, where I seemed to be suffocating,--I stood so, lookingwildly at him, until I grasped at the chair, when the room began tosurge and turn.  He caught me, drew me to the sofa, put me upagainst the cushions, and bent on one knee before me, bringing theface that I now well remembered, and that I shuddered at, very nearto mine.

"Yes, Pip, dear boy, I've made a gentleman on you!  It's me wot hasdone it!  I swore that time, sure as ever I earned a guinea, thatguinea should go to you.  I swore arterwards, sure as ever Ispec'lated and got rich, you should get rich.  I lived rough, thatyou should live smooth; I worked hard, that you should be abovework.  What odds, dear boy?  Do I tell it, fur you to feel aobligation?  Not a bit.  I tell it, fur you to know as that therehunted dunghill dog wot you kep life in, got his head so high thathe could make a gentleman,--and, Pip, you're him!"

The abhorrence in which I held the man, the dread I had of him, therepugnance with which I shrank from him, could not have beenexceeded if he had been some terrible beast.

"Look'ee here, Pip.  I'm your second father.  You're my son,--more tome nor any son.  I've put away money, only for you to spend.  When Iwas a hired-out shepherd in a solitary hut, not seeing no faces butfaces of sheep till I half forgot wot men's and women's faces woslike, I see yourn.  I drops my knife many a time in that hut when Iwas a-eating my dinner or my supper, and I says, 'Here's the boyagain, a looking at me whiles I eats and drinks!'  I see you there amany times, as plain as ever I see you on them misty marshes.  'Lordstrike me dead!' I says each time,--and I goes out in the air tosay it under the open heavens,--'but wot, if I gets liberty andmoney, I'll make that boy a gentleman!'  And I done it.  Why, look atyou, dear boy!  Look at these here lodgings o'yourn, fit for a lord!A lord?  Ah!  You shall show money with lords for wagers, and beat'em!"

In his heat and triumph, and in his knowledge that I had beennearly fainting, he did not remark on my reception of all this.  Itwas the one grain of relief I had.

"Look'ee here!" he went on, taking my watch out of my pocket, andturning towards him a ring on my finger, while I recoiled from histouch as if he had been a snake, "a gold 'un and a beauty:  that's agentleman's, I hope!  A diamond all set round with rubies; that's agentleman's, I hope!  Look at your linen; fine and beautiful!  Lookat your clothes; better ain't to be got!  And your books too,"turning his eyes round the room, "mounting up, on their shelves, byhundreds!  And you read 'em; don't you?  I see you'd been a readingof 'em when I come in.  Ha, ha, ha!  You shall read 'em to me, dearboy!  And if they're in foreign languages wot I don't understand, Ishall be just as proud as if I did."

Again he took both my hands and put them to his lips, while myblood ran cold within me.

"Don't you mind talking, Pip," said he, after again drawing hissleeve over his eyes and forehead, as the click came in his throatwhich I well remembered,--and he was all the more horrible to methat he was so much in earnest; "you can't do better nor keepquiet, dear boy.  You ain't looked slowly forward to this as I have;you wosn't prepared for this as I wos.  But didn't you never thinkit might be me?"

"O no, no, no," I returned, "Never, never!"

"Well, you see it wos me, and single-handed.  Never a soul in it butmy own self and Mr. Jaggers."

"Was there no one else?" I asked.

"No," said he, with a glance of surprise:  "who else should therebe?  And, dear boy, how good looking you have growed!  There's brighteyes somewheres--eh?  Isn't there bright eyes somewheres, wot youlove the thoughts on?"

O Estella, Estella!

"They shall be yourn, dear boy, if money can buy 'em.  Not that agentleman like you, so well set up as you, can't win 'em off of hisown game; but money shall back you!  Let me finish wot I was atelling you, dear boy.  From that there hut and that therehiring-out, I got money left me by my master (which died, and hadbeen the same as me), and got my liberty and went for myself.  Inevery single thing I went for, I went for you.  'Lord strike ablight upon it,' I says, wotever it was I went for, 'if it ain'tfor him!'  It all prospered wonderful.  As I giv' you to understandjust now, I'm famous for it.  It was the money left me, and thegains of the first few year wot I sent home to Mr. Jaggers--all foryou--when he first come arter you, agreeable to my letter."

O that he had never come!  That he had left me at the forge,--farfrom contented, yet, by comparison happy!

"And then, dear boy, it was a recompense to me, look'ee here, toknow in secret that I was making a gentleman.  The blood horses ofthem colonists might fling up the dust over me as I was walking;what do I say?  I says to myself, 'I'm making a better gentleman norever you'll be!'  When one of 'em says to another, 'He was aconvict, a few year ago, and is a ignorant common fellow now, forall he's lucky,' what do I say?  I says to myself, 'If I ain't agentleman, nor yet ain't got no learning, I'm the owner of such.All on you owns stock and land; which on you owns a brought-upLondon gentleman?'  This way I kep myself a going.  And this way Iheld steady afore my mind that I would for certain come one day andsee my boy, and make myself known to him, on his own ground."

He laid his hand on my shoulder.  I shuddered at the thought thatfor anything I knew, his hand might be stained with blood.

"It warn't easy, Pip, for me to leave them parts, nor yet it warn'tsafe.  But I held to it, and the harder it was, the stronger I held,for I was determined, and my mind firm made up.  At last I done it.Dear boy, I done it!"

I tried to collect my thoughts, but I was stunned.  Throughout, Ihad seemed to myself to attend more to the wind and the rain thanto him; even now, I could not separate his voice from those voices,though those were loud and his was silent.

"Where will you put me?" he asked, presently.  "I must be putsomewheres, dear boy."

"To sleep?" said I.

"Yes.  And to sleep long and sound," he answered; "for I've beensea-tossed and sea-washed, months and months."

"My friend and companion," said I, rising from the sofa, "isabsent; you must have his room."

"He won't come back to-morrow; will he?"

"No," said I, answering almost mechanically, in spite of my utmostefforts; "not to-morrow."

"Because, look'ee here, dear boy," he said, dropping his voice, andlaying a long finger on my breast in an impressive manner, "cautionis necessary."

"How do you mean?  Caution?"

"By G - , it's Death!"

"What's death?"

"I was sent for life.  It's death to come back.  There's beenovermuch coming back of late years, and I should of a certainty behanged if took."

Nothing was needed but this; the wretched man, after loadingwretched me with his gold and silver chains for years, had riskedhis life to come to me, and I held it there in my keeping!  If I hadloved him instead of abhorring him; if I had been attracted to himby the strongest admiration and affection, instead of shrinkingfrom him with the strongest repugnance; it could have been noworse.  On the contrary, it would have been better, for hispreservation would then have naturally and tenderly addressed myheart.

My first care was to close the shutters, so that no light might beseen from without, and then to close and make fast the doors.  WhileI did so, he stood at the table drinking rum and eating biscuit;and when I saw him thus engaged, I saw my convict on the marshes athis meal again.  It almost seemed to me as if he must stoop downpresently, to file at his leg.

When I had gone into Herbert's room, and had shut off any othercommunication between it and the staircase than through the room inwhich our conversation had been held, I asked him if he would go tobed?  He said yes, but asked me for some of my "gentleman's linen"to put on in the morning.  I brought it out, and laid it ready forhim, and my blood again ran cold when he again took me by bothhands to give me good night.

I got away from him, without knowing how I did it, and mended thefire in the room where we had been together, and sat down by it,afraid to go to bed.  For an hour or more, I remained too stunned tothink; and it was not until I began to think, that I began fully toknow how wrecked I was, and how the ship in which I had sailed wasgone to pieces.

Miss Havisham's intentions towards me, all a mere dream; Estellanot designed for me; I only suffered in Satis House as aconvenience, a sting for the greedy relations, a model with amechanical heart to practise on when no other practice was at hand;those were the first smarts I had.  But, sharpest and deepest painof all,--it was for the convict, guilty of I knew not what crimes,and liable to be taken out of those rooms where I sat thinking, andhanged at the Old Bailey door, that I had deserted Joe.

I would not have gone back to Joe now, I would not have gone backto Biddy now, for any consideration; simply, I suppose, because mysense of my own worthless conduct to them was greater than everyconsideration.  No wisdom on earth could have given me the comfortthat I should have derived from their simplicity and fidelity; butI could never, never, undo what I had done.

In every rage of wind and rush of rain, I heard pursuers.  Twice, Icould have sworn there was a knocking and whispering at the outerdoor.  With these fears upon me, I began either to imagine or recallthat I had had mysterious warnings of this man's approach.  That,for weeks gone by, I had passed faces in the streets which I hadthought like his.  That these likenesses had grown more numerous,as he, coming over the sea, had drawn nearer.  That his wickedspirit had somehow sent these messengers to mine, and that now onthis stormy night he was as good as his word, and with me.

Crowding up with these reflections came the reflection that I hadseen him with my childish eyes to be a desperately violent man;that I had heard that other convict reiterate that he had tried tomurder him; that I had seen him down in the ditch tearing andfighting like a wild beast.  Out of such remembrances I brought intothe light of the fire a half-formed terror that it might not besafe to be shut up there with him in the dead of the wild solitarynight.  This dilated until it filled the room, and impelled me totake a candle and go in and look at my dreadful burden.

He had rolled a handkerchief round his head, and his face was setand lowering in his sleep.  But he was asleep, and quietly too,though he had a pistol lying on the pillow.  Assured of this, Isoftly removed the key to the outside of his door, and turned it onhim before I again sat down by the fire.  Gradually I slipped fromthe chair and lay on the floor.  When I awoke without having partedin my sleep with the perception of my wretchedness, the clocks ofthe Eastward churches were striking five, the candles were wastedout, the fire was dead, and the wind and rain intensified the thickblack darkness.

THIS IS THE END OF THE SECOND STAGE OF PIP'S EXPECTATIONS.

Chapter XL

It was fortunate for me that I had to take precautions to ensure(so far as I could) the safety of my dreaded visitor; for, thisthought pressing on me when I awoke, held other thoughts in aconfused concourse at a distance.

The impossibility of keeping him concealed in the chambers wasself-evident.  It could not be done, and the attempt to do it wouldinevitably engender suspicion.  True, I had no Avenger in my servicenow, but I was looked after by an inflammatory old female, assistedby an animated rag-bag whom she called her niece, and to keep aroom secret from them would be to invite curiosity andexaggeration.  They both had weak eyes, which I had long attributedto their chronically looking in at keyholes, and they were alwaysat hand when not wanted; indeed that was their only reliablequality besides larceny.  Not to get up a mystery with these people,I resolved to announce in the morning that my uncle hadunexpectedly come from the country.

This course I decided on while I was yet groping about in thedarkness for the means of getting a light.  Not stumbling on themeans after all, I was fain to go out to the adjacent Lodge and getthe watchman there to come with his lantern.  Now, in groping my waydown the black staircase I fell over something, and that somethingwas a man crouching in a corner.

As the man made no answer when I asked him what he did there, buteluded my touch in silence, I ran to the Lodge and urged thewatchman to come quickly; telling him of the incident on the wayback.  The wind being as fierce as ever, we did not care to endangerthe light in the lantern by rekindling the extinguished lamps onthe staircase, but we examined the staircase from the bottom to thetop and found no one there.  It then occurred to me as possible thatthe man might have slipped into my rooms; so, lighting my candle atthe watchman's, and leaving him standing at the door, I examinedthem carefully, including the room in which my dreaded guest layasleep.  All was quiet, and assuredly no other man was in thosechambers.

It troubled me that there should have been a lurker on the stairs,on that night of all nights in the year, and I asked the watchman,on the chance of eliciting some hopeful explanation as I handed hima dram at the door, whether he had admitted at his gate anygentleman who had perceptibly been dining out?  Yes, he said; atdifferent times of the night, three.  One lived in Fountain Court,and the other two lived in the Lane, and he had seen them all gohome.  Again, the only other man who dwelt in the house of which mychambers formed a part had been in the country for some weeks, andhe certainly had not returned in the night, because we had seen hisdoor with his seal on it as we came up-stairs.

"The night being so bad, sir," said the watchman, as he gave meback my glass, "uncommon few have come in at my gate.  Besides themthree gentlemen that I have named, I don't call to mind anothersince about eleven o'clock, when a stranger asked for you."

"My uncle," I muttered.  "Yes."

"You saw him, sir?"

"Yes.  Oh yes."

"Likewise the person with him?"

"Person with him!" I repeated.

"I judged the person to be with him," returned the watchman.  "Theperson stopped, when he stopped to make inquiry of me, and theperson took this way when he took this way."

"What sort of person?"

The watchman had not particularly noticed; he should say a workingperson; to the best of his belief, he had a dust-colored kind ofclothes on, under a dark coat.  The watchman made more light of thematter than I did, and naturally; not having my reason forattaching weight to it.

When I had got rid of him, which I thought it well to do withoutprolonging explanations, my mind was much troubled by these twocircumstances taken together.  Whereas they were easy of innocentsolution apart,--as, for instance, some diner out or diner at home,who had not gone near this watchman's gate, might have strayed tomy staircase and dropped asleep there,--and my nameless visitormight have brought some one with him to show him the way,--still,joined, they had an ugly look to one as prone to distrust and fearas the changes of a few hours had made me.

I lighted my fire, which burnt with a raw pale flare at that timeof the morning, and fell into a doze before it.  I seemed to havebeen dozing a whole night when the clocks struck six.  As there wasfull an hour and a half between me and daylight, I dozed again;now, waking up uneasily, with prolix conversations about nothing,in my ears; now, making thunder of the wind in the chimney; atlength, falling off into a profound sleep from which the daylightwoke me with a start.

All this time I had never been able to consider my own situation,nor could I do so yet.  I had not the power to attend to it.  I wasgreatly dejected and distressed, but in an incoherent wholesalesort of way.  As to forming any plan for the future, I could as soonhave formed an elephant.  When I opened the shutters and looked outat the wet wild morning, all of a leaden hue; when I walked fromroom to room; when I sat down again shivering, before the fire,waiting for my laundress to appear; I thought how miserable I was,but hardly knew why, or how long I had been so, or on what day ofthe week I made the reflection, or even who I was that made it.

At last, the old woman and the niece came in,--the latter with ahead not easily distinguishable from her dusty broom,--andtestified surprise at sight of me and the fire.  To whom I impartedhow my uncle had come in the night and was then asleep, and how thebreakfast preparations were to be modified accordingly.  Then Iwashed and dressed while they knocked the furniture about and madea dust; and so, in a sort of dream or sleep-waking, I found myselfsitting by the fire again, waiting for-Him--to come tobreakfast.

By and by, his door opened and he came out.  I could not bringmyself to bear the sight of him, and I thought he had a worse lookby daylight.

"I do not even know," said I, speaking low as he took his seat atthe table, "by what name to call you.  I have given out that you aremy uncle."

"That's it, dear boy!  Call me uncle."

"You assumed some name, I suppose, on board ship?"

"Yes, dear boy.  I took the name of Provis."

"Do you mean to keep that name?"

"Why, yes, dear boy, it's as good as another,--unless you'd likeanother."

"What is your real name?" I asked him in a whisper.

"Magwitch," he answered, in the same tone; "chrisen'd Abel."

"What were you brought up to be?"

"A warmint, dear boy."

He answered quite seriously, and used the word as if it denotedsome profession.

"When you came into the Temple last night--" said I, pausing towonder whether that could really have been last night, which seemedso long ago.

"Yes, dear boy?"

"When you came in at the gate and asked the watchman the way here,had you any one with you?"

"With me?  No, dear boy."

"But there was some one there?"

"I didn't take particular notice," he said, dubiously, "not knowingthe ways of the place.  But I think there was a person, too, come inalonger me."

"Are you known in London?"

"I hope not!" said he, giving his neck a jerk with his forefingerthat made me turn hot and sick.

"Were you known in London, once?"

"Not over and above, dear boy.  I was in the provinces mostly."

"Were you-tried--in London?"

"Which time?" said he, with a sharp look.

"The last time."

He nodded.  "First knowed Mr. Jaggers that way.  Jaggers was for me."

It was on my lips to ask him what he was tried for, but he took upa knife, gave it a flourish, and with the words, "And what I doneis worked out and paid for!" fell to at his breakfast.

He ate in a ravenous way that was very disagreeable, and all hisactions were uncouth, noisy, and greedy.  Some of his teeth hadfailed him since I saw him eat on the marshes, and as he turned hisfood in his mouth, and turned his head sideways to bring hisstrongest fangs to bear upon it, he looked terribly like a hungry olddog.  If I had begun with any appetite, he would have taken it away,and I should have sat much as I did,--repelled from him by aninsurmountable aversion, and gloomily looking at the cloth.

"I'm a heavy grubber, dear boy," he said, as a polite kind ofapology when he made an end of his meal, "but I always was.  If ithad been in my constitution to be a lighter grubber, I might ha'got into lighter trouble.  Similarly, I must have my smoke.  When Iwas first hired out as shepherd t'other side the world, it's mybelief I should ha' turned into a molloncolly-mad sheep myself, ifI hadn't a had my smoke."

As he said so, he got up from table, and putting his hand into thebreast of the pea-coat he wore, brought out a short black pipe, anda handful of loose tobacco of the kind that is called Negro-head.Having filled his pipe, he put the surplus tobacco back again, asif his pocket were a drawer.  Then, he took a live coal from thefire with the tongs, and lighted his pipe at it, and then turnedround on the hearth-rug with his back to the fire, and went throughhis favorite action of holding out both his hands for mine.

"And this," said he, dandling my hands up and down in his, as hepuffed at his pipe,--"and this is the gentleman what I made!  Thereal genuine One!  It does me good fur to look at you, Pip.  All Istip'late, is, to stand by and look at you, dear boy!"

I released my hands as soon as I could, and found that I wasbeginning slowly to settle down to the contemplation of mycondition.  What I was chained to, and how heavily, becameintelligible to me, as I heard his hoarse voice, and sat looking upat his furrowed bald head with its iron gray hair at the sides.

"I mustn't see my gentleman a footing it in the mire of thestreets; there mustn't be no mud on his boots.  My gentleman musthave horses, Pip!  Horses to ride, and horses to drive, and horsesfor his servant to ride and drive as well.  Shall colonists havetheir horses (and blood 'uns, if you please, good Lord!) and not myLondon gentleman?  No, no.  We'll show 'em another pair of shoes thanthat, Pip; won't us?"

He took out of his pocket a great thick pocket-book, bursting withpapers, and tossed it on the table.

"There's something worth spending in that there book, dear boy.It's yourn.  All I've got ain't mine; it's yourn.  Don't you beafeerd on it.  There's more where that come from.  I've come to theold country fur to see my gentleman spend his money like agentleman.  That'll be my pleasure.  My pleasure 'ull be fur to seehim do it.  And blast you all!" he wound up, looking round the roomand snapping his fingers once with a loud snap, "blast you everyone, from the judge in his wig, to the colonist a stirring up thedust, I'll show a better gentleman than the whole kit on you puttogether!"

"Stop!" said I, almost in a frenzy of fear and dislike, "I want tospeak to you.  I want to know what is to be done.  I want to know howyou are to be kept out of danger, how long you are going to stay,what projects you have."

"Look'ee here, Pip," said he, laying his hand on my arm in asuddenly altered and subdued manner; "first of all, look'ee here.  Iforgot myself half a minute ago.  What I said was low; that's whatit was; low.  Look'ee here, Pip.  Look over it.  I ain't a going to below."

"First," I resumed, half groaning, "what precautions can be takenagainst your being recognized and seized?"

"No, dear boy," he said, in the same tone as before, "that don't gofirst.  Lowness goes first.  I ain't took so many year to make agentleman, not without knowing what's due to him.  Look'ee here,Pip.  I was low; that's what I was; low.  Look over it, dear boy."

Some sense of the grimly-ludicrous moved me to a fretful laugh, asI replied, "I have looked over it.  In Heaven's name, don't harpupon it!"

"Yes, but look'ee here," he persisted.  "Dear boy, I ain't come sofur, not fur to be low.  Now, go on, dear boy.  You was a saying--"

"How are you to be guarded from the danger you have incurred?"

"Well, dear boy, the danger ain't so great.  Without I was informedagen, the danger ain't so much to signify.  There's Jaggers, andthere's Wemmick, and there's you.  Who else is there to inform?"

"Is there no chance person who might identify you in the street?"said I.

"Well," he returned, "there ain't many.  Nor yet I don't intend toadvertise myself in the newspapers by the name of A.M. come backfrom Botany Bay; and years have rolled away, and who's to gain byit?  Still, look'ee here, Pip.  If the danger had been fifty times asgreat, I should ha' come to see you, mind you, just the same."

"And how long do you remain?"

"How long?" said he, taking his black pipe from his mouth, anddropping his jaw as he stared at me.  "I'm not a going back.  I'vecome for good."

"Where are you to live?" said I.  "What is to be done with you?Where will you be safe?"

"Dear boy," he returned, "there's disguising wigs can be bought formoney, and there's hair powder, and spectacles, and black clothes,--shorts and what not.  Others has done it safe afore, and what othershas done afore, others can do agen.  As to the where and how ofliving, dear boy, give me your own opinions on it."

"You take it smoothly now," said I, "but you were very serious lastnight, when you swore it was Death."

"And so I swear it is Death," said he, putting his pipe back in hismouth, "and Death by the rope, in the open street not fur fromthis, and it's serious that you should fully understand it to beso.  What then, when that's once done?  Here I am.  To go back now'ud be as bad as to stand ground--worse.  Besides, Pip, I'm here,because I've meant it by you, years and years.  As to what I dare,I'm a old bird now, as has dared all manner of traps since first hewas fledged, and I'm not afeerd to perch upon a scarecrow.  Ifthere's Death hid inside of it, there is, and let him come out, andI'll face him, and then I'll believe in him and not afore.  And nowlet me have a look at my gentleman agen."

Once more, he took me by both hands and surveyed me with an air ofadmiring proprietorship:  smoking with great complacency all thewhile.

It appeared to me that I could do no better than secure him somequiet lodging hard by, of which he might take possession whenHerbert returned:  whom I expected in two or three days.  That thesecret must be confided to Herbert as a matter of unavoidablenecessity, even if I could have put the immense relief I shouldderive from sharing it with him out of the question, was plain tome.  But it was by no means so plain to Mr. Provis (I resolved tocall him by that name), who reserved his consent to Herbert'sparticipation until he should have seen him and formed a favorablejudgment of his physiognomy.  "And even then, dear boy," said he,pulling a greasy little clasped black Testament out of his pocket,"we'll have him on his oath."

To state that my terrible patron carried this little black bookabout the world solely to swear people on in cases of emergency,would be to state what I never quite established; but this I cansay, that I never knew him put it to any other use.  The book itselfhad the appearance of having been stolen from some court ofjustice, and perhaps his knowledge of its antecedents, combinedwith his own experience in that wise, gave him a reliance on itspowers as a sort of legal spell or charm.  On this first occasion ofhis producing it, I recalled how he had made me swear fidelity inthe churchyard long ago, and how he had described himself lastnight as always swearing to his resolutions in his solitude.

As he was at present dressed in a seafaring slop suit, in which helooked as if he had some parrots and cigars to dispose of, I nextdiscussed with him what dress he should wear.  He cherished anextraordinary belief in the virtues of "shorts" as a disguise, andhad in his own mind sketched a dress for himself that would havemade him something between a dean and a dentist.  It was withconsiderable difficulty that I won him over to the assumption of adress more like a prosperous farmer's; and we arranged that heshould cut his hair close, and wear a little powder.  Lastly, as hehad not yet been seen by the laundress or her niece, he was to keephimself out of their view until his change of dress was made.

It would seem a simple matter to decide on these precautions; butin my dazed, not to say distracted, state, it took so long, that Idid not get out to further them until two or three in theafternoon.  He was to remain shut up in the chambers while I wasgone, and was on no account to open the door.

There being to my knowledge a respectable lodging-house inEssex Street, the back of which looked into the Temple, and wasalmost within hail of my windows, I first of all repaired to thathouse, and was so fortunate as to secure the second floor for myuncle, Mr. Provis.  I then went from shop to shop, making suchpurchases as were necessary to the change in his appearance.  Thisbusiness transacted, I turned my face, on my own account, to LittleBritain.  Mr. Jaggers was at his desk, but, seeing me enter, got upimmediately and stood before his fire.

"Now, Pip," said he, "be careful."

"I will, sir," I returned.  For, coming along I had thought well ofwhat I was going to say.

"Don't commit yourself," said Mr. Jaggers, "and don't commit anyone.  You understand--any one.  Don't tell me anything:  I don't wantto know anything; I am not curious."

Of course I saw that he knew the man was come.

"I merely want, Mr. Jaggers," said I, "to assure myself that what Ihave been told is true.  I have no hope of its being untrue, but atleast I may verify it."

Mr. Jaggers nodded.  "But did you say 'told' or 'informed'?" he askedme, with his head on one side, and not looking at me, but lookingin a listening way at the floor.  "Told would seem to imply verbalcommunication.  You can't have verbal communication with a man inNew South Wales, you know."

"I will say, informed, Mr. Jaggers."

"Good."

"I have been informed by a person named Abel Magwitch, that he isthe benefactor so long unknown to me."

"That is the man," said Mr. Jaggers, "in New South Wales."

"And only he?" said I.

"And only he," said Mr. Jaggers.

"I am not so unreasonable, sir, as to think you at all responsiblefor my mistakes and wrong conclusions; but I always supposed it wasMiss Havisham."

"As you say, Pip," returned Mr. Jaggers, turning his eyes upon mecoolly, and taking a bite at his forefinger, "I am not at allresponsible for that."

"And yet it looked so like it, sir," I pleaded with a downcastheart.

"Not a particle of evidence, Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, shaking hishead and gathering up his skirts.  "Take nothing on its looks; takeeverything on evidence.  There's no better rule."

"I have no more to say," said I, with a sigh, after standing silentfor a little while.  "I have verified my information, and there's anend."

"And Magwitch--in New South Wales--having at last disclosedhimself," said Mr. Jaggers, "you will comprehend, Pip, how rigidlythroughout my communication with you, I have always adhered to thestrict line of fact.  There has never been the least departure fromthe strict line of fact.  You are quite aware of that?"

"Quite, sir."

"I communicated to Magwitch--in New South Wales--when he firstwrote to me--from New South Wales--the caution that he must notexpect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact.  I alsocommunicated to him another caution.  He appeared to me to haveobscurely hinted in his letter at some distant idea he had ofseeing you in England here.  I cautioned him that I must hear nomore of that; that he was not at all likely to obtain a pardon;that he was expatriated for the term of his natural life; and thathis presenting himself in this country would be an act of felony,rendering him liable to the extreme penalty of the law.  I gaveMagwitch that caution," said Mr. Jaggers, looking hard at me; "Iwrote it to New South Wales.  He guided himself by it, no doubt."

"No doubt," said I.

"I have been informed by Wemmick," pursued Mr. Jaggers, stilllooking hard at me, "that he has received a letter, under datePortsmouth, from a colonist of the name of Purvis, or--"

"Or Provis," I suggested.

"Or Provis--thank you, Pip.  Perhaps it is Provis?  Perhaps you knowit's Provis?"

"Yes," said I.

"You know it's Provis.  A letter, under date Portsmouth, from acolonist of the name of Provis, asking for the particulars of youraddress, on behalf of Magwitch.  Wemmick sent him the particulars, Iunderstand, by return of post.  Probably it is through Provis thatyou have received the explanation of Magwitch--in New SouthWales?"

"It came through Provis," I replied.

"Good day, Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, offering his hand; "glad to haveseen you.  In writing by post to Magwitch--in New South Wales--orin communicating with him through Provis, have the goodness tomention that the particulars and vouchers of our long account shallbe sent to you, together with the balance; for there is still abalance remaining.  Good day, Pip!"

We shook hands, and he looked hard at me as long as he could seeme.  I turned at the door, and he was still looking hard at me,while the two vile casts on the shelf seemed to be trying to gettheir eyelids open, and to force out of their swollen throats, "O,what a man he is!"

Wemmick was out, and though he had been at his desk he could havedone nothing for me.  I went straight back to the Temple, where Ifound the terrible Provis drinking rum and water and smokingnegro-head, in safety.

Next day the clothes I had ordered all came home, and he put themon.  Whatever he put on, became him less (it dismally seemed to me)than what he had worn before.  To my thinking, there was somethingin him that made it hopeless to attempt to disguise him.  The more Idressed him and the better I dressed him, the more he looked likethe slouching fugitive on the marshes.  This effect on my anxiousfancy was partly referable, no doubt, to his old face and mannergrowing more familiar to me; but I believe too that he dragged oneof his legs as if there were still a weight of iron on it, and thatfrom head to foot there was Convict in the very grain of the man.

The influences of his solitary hut-life were upon him besides, andgave him a savage air that no dress could tame; added to thesewere the influences of his subsequent branded life among men, and,crowning all, his consciousness that he was dodging and hiding now.In all his ways of sitting and standing, and eating and drinking,--of brooding about in a high-shouldered reluctant style,--of takingout his great horn-handled jackknife and wiping it on his legs andcutting his food,--of lifting light glasses and cups to his lips,as if they were clumsy pannikins,--of chopping a wedge off hisbread, and soaking up with it the last fragments of gravy round andround his plate, as if to make the most of an allowance, and thendrying his finger-ends on it, and then swallowing it,--in theseways and a thousand other small nameless instances arising everyminute in the day, there was Prisoner, Felon, Bondsman, plain asplain could be.

It had been his own idea to wear that touch of powder, and I hadconceded the powder after overcoming the shorts.  But I can comparethe effect of it, when on, to nothing but the probable effect ofrouge upon the dead; so awful was the manner in which everything inhim that it was most desirable to repress, started through thatthin layer of pretence, and seemed to come blazing out at the crownof his head.  It was abandoned as soon as tried, and he wore hisgrizzled hair cut short.

Words cannot tell what a sense I had, at the same time, of thedreadful mystery that he was to me.  When he fell asleep of anevening, with his knotted hands clenching the sides of theeasy-chair, and his bald head tattooed with deep wrinkles fallingforward on his breast, I would sit and look at him, wondering whathe had done, and loading him with all the crimes in the Calendar,until the impulse was powerful on me to start up and fly from him.Every hour so increased my abhorrence of him, that I even think Imight have yielded to this impulse in the first agonies of being sohaunted, notwithstanding all he had done for me and the risk heran, but for the knowledge that Herbert must soon come back.  Once,I actually did start out of bed in the night, and begin to dressmyself in my worst clothes, hurriedly intending to leave him therewith everything else I possessed, and enlist for India as a privatesoldier.

I doubt if a ghost could have been more terrible to me, up in thoselonely rooms in the long evenings and long nights, with the windand the rain always rushing by.  A ghost could not have been takenand hanged on my account, and the consideration that he could be,and the dread that he would be, were no small addition to myhorrors.  When he was not asleep, or playing a complicated kind ofPatience with a ragged pack of cards of his own,--a game that Inever saw before or since, and in which he recorded his winnings bysticking his jackknife into the table,--when he was not engaged ineither of these pursuits, he would ask me to read to him,--"Foreignlanguage, dear boy!"  While I complied, he, not comprehending asingle word, would stand before the fire surveying me with the airof an Exhibitor, and I would see him, between the fingers of thehand with which I shaded my face, appealing in dumb show to thefurniture to take notice of my proficiency.  The imaginary studentpursued by the misshapen creature he had impiously made, was notmore wretched than I, pursued by the creature who had made me, andrecoiling from him with a stronger repulsion, the more he admiredme and the fonder he was of me.

This is written of, I am sensible, as if it had lasted a year.  Itlasted about five days.  Expecting Herbert all the time, I dared notgo out, except when I took Provis for an airing after dark.  Atlength, one evening when dinner was over and I had dropped into aslumber quite worn out,--for my nights had been agitated and myrest broken by fearful dreams,--I was roused by the welcomefootstep on the staircase.  Provis, who had been asleep too,staggered up at the noise I made, and in an instant I saw hisjackknife shining in his hand.

"Quiet!  It's Herbert!" I said; and Herbert came bursting in, withthe airy freshness of six hundred miles of France upon him.

"Handel, my dear fellow, how are you, and again how are you, andagain how are you?  I seem to have been gone a twelvemonth!  Why, so Imust have been, for you have grown quite thin and pale!  Handel, my--Halloa!  I beg your pardon."

He was stopped in his running on and in his shaking hands with me,by seeing Provis.  Provis, regarding him with a fixed attention, wasslowly putting up his jackknife, and groping in another pocket forsomething else.

"Herbert, my dear friend," said I, shutting the double doors, whileHerbert stood staring and wondering, "something very strange hashappened.  This is--a visitor of mine."

"It's all right, dear boy!" said Provis coming forward, with hislittle clasped black book, and then addressing himself to Herbert."Take it in your right hand.  Lord strike you dead on the spot, ifever you split in any way sumever!  Kiss it!"

"Do so, as he wishes it," I said to Herbert.  So, Herbert, lookingat me with a friendly uneasiness and amazement, complied, andProvis immediately shaking hands with him, said, "Now you're onyour oath, you know.  And never believe me on mine, if Pip shan'tmake a gentleman on you!"

Chapter XLI

In vain should I attempt to describe the astonishment and disquietof Herbert, when he and I and Provis sat down before the fire, andI recounted the whole of the secret.  Enough, that I saw my ownfeelings reflected in Herbert's face, and not least among them, myrepugnance towards the man who had done so much for me.

What would alone have set a division between that man and us, ifthere had been no other dividing circumstance, was his triumph inmy story.  Saving his troublesome sense of having been "low' on oneoccasion since his return,--on which point he began to hold forthto Herbert, the moment my revelation was finished,--he had noperception of the possibility of my finding any fault with my goodfortune.  His boast that he had made me a gentleman, and that he hadcome to see me support the character on his ample resources, wasmade for me quite as much as for himself.  And that it was a highlyagreeable boast to both of us, and that we must both be very proudof it, was a conclusion quite established in his own mind.

"Though, look'ee here, Pip's comrade," he said to Herbert, afterhaving discoursed for some time, "I know very well that once sinceI come back--for half a minute--I've been low.  I said to Pip, Iknowed as I had been low.  But don't you fret yourself on thatscore.  I ain't made Pip a gentleman, and Pip ain't a going to makeyou a gentleman, not fur me not to know what's due to ye both.  Dearboy, and Pip's comrade, you two may count upon me always having agen-teel muzzle on.  Muzzled I have been since that half a minutewhen I was betrayed into lowness, muzzled I am at the present time,muzzled I ever will be."

Herbert said, "Certainly," but looked as if there were no specificconsolation in this, and remained perplexed and dismayed.  We wereanxious for the time when he would go to his lodging and leave ustogether, but he was evidently jealous of leaving us together, andsat late.  It was midnight before I took him round to Essex Street,and saw him safely in at his own dark door.  When it closed uponhim, I experienced the first moment of relief I had known since thenight of his arrival.

Never quite free from an uneasy remembrance of the man on thestairs, I had always looked about me in taking my guest out afterdark, and in bringing him back; and I looked about me now.Difficult as it is in a large city to avoid the suspicion of beingwatched, when the mind is conscious of danger in that regard, Icould not persuade myself that any of the people within sight caredabout my movements.  The few who were passing passed on theirseveral ways, and the street was empty when I turned back into theTemple.  Nobody had come out at the gate with us, nobody went in atthe gate with me.  As I crossed by the fountain, I saw his lightedback windows looking bright and quiet, and, when I stood for a fewmoments in the doorway of the building where I lived, before goingup the stairs, Garden Court was as still and lifeless as thestaircase was when I ascended it.

Herbert received me with open arms, and I had never felt before soblessedly what it is to have a friend.  When he had spoken somesound words of sympathy and encouragement, we sat down to considerthe question, What was to be done?

The chair that Provis had occupied still remaining where it hadStood,--for he had a barrack way with him of hanging about onespot, in one unsettled manner, and going through one round ofobservances with his pipe and his negro-head and his jackknife andhis pack of cards, and what not, as if it were all put down for himon a slate,--I say his chair remaining where it had stood, Herbertunconsciously took it, but next moment started out of it, pushed itaway, and took another.  He had no occasion to say after that thathe had conceived an aversion for my patron, neither had I occasionto confess my own.  We interchanged that confidence without shapinga syllable.

"What," said I to Herbert, when he was safe in another chair,--"whatis to be done?"

"My poor dear Handel," he replied, holding his head, "I am toostunned to think."

"So was I, Herbert, when the blow first fell.  Still, something mustbe done.  He is intent upon various new expenses,--horses, andcarriages, and lavish appearances of all kinds.  He must be stoppedsomehow."

"You mean that you can't accept--"

"How can I?" I interposed, as Herbert paused.  "Think of him!  Look athim!"

An involuntary shudder passed over both of us.

"Yet I am afraid the dreadful truth is, Herbert, that he isattached to me, strongly attached to me.  Was there ever such afate!"

"My poor dear Handel," Herbert repeated.

"Then," said I, "after all, stopping short here, never takinganother penny from him, think what I owe him already!  Then again:  Iam heavily in debt,--very heavily for me, who have now noexpectations,--and I have been bred to no calling, and I am fit fornothing."

"Well, well, well!" Herbert remonstrated.  "Don't say fit fornothing."

"What am I fit for?  I know only one thing that I am fit for, andthat is, to go for a soldier.  And I might have gone, my dearHerbert, but for the prospect of taking counsel with yourfriendship and affection."

Of course I broke down there:  and of course Herbert, beyond seizinga warm grip of my hand, pretended not to know it.

"Anyhow, my dear Handel," said he presently, "soldiering won't do.If you were to renounce this patronage and these favors, I supposeyou would do so with some faint hope of one day repaying what youhave already had.  Not very strong, that hope, if you wentsoldiering!  Besides, it's absurd.  You would be infinitely better inClarriker's house, small as it is.  I am working up towards apartnership, you know."

Poor fellow!  He little suspected with whose money.

"But there is another question," said Herbert.  "This is an ignorant,determined man, who has long had one fixed idea.  More than that, heseems to me (I may misjudge him) to be a man of a desperate andfierce character."

"I know he is," I returned.  "Let me tell you what evidence I haveseen of it."  And I told him what I had not mentioned in mynarrative, of that encounter with the other convict.

"See, then," said Herbert; "think of this!  He comes here at theperil of his life, for the realization of his fixed idea.  In themoment of realization, after all his toil and waiting, you cut theground from under his feet, destroy his idea, and make his gainsworthless to him.  Do you see nothing that he might do, under thedisappointment?"

"I have seen it, Herbert, and dreamed of it, ever since the fatalnight of his arrival.  Nothing has been in my thoughts sodistinctly as his putting himself in the way of being taken."

"Then you may rely upon it," said Herbert, "that there would begreat danger of his doing it.  That is his power over you as long ashe remains in England, and that would be his reckless course if youforsook him."

I was so struck by the horror of this idea, which had weighed uponme from the first, and the working out of which would make meregard myself, in some sort, as his murderer, that I could not restin my chair, but began pacing to and fro.  I said to Herbert,meanwhile, that even if Provis were recognized and taken, in spiteof himself, I should be wretched as the cause, however innocently.Yes; even though I was so wretched in having him at large and nearme, and even though I would far rather have worked at the forgeall the days of my life than I would ever have come to this!

But there was no staving off the question, What was to be done?

"The first and the main thing to be done," said Herbert, "is to gethim out of England.  You will have to go with him, and then he maybe induced to go."

"But get him where I will, could I prevent his coming back?"

"My good Handel, is it not obvious that with Newgate in the nextstreet, there must be far greater hazard in your breaking your mindto him and making him reckless, here, than elsewhere.  If a pretextto get him away could be made out of that other convict, or out ofanything else in his life, now."

"There, again!" said I, stopping before Herbert, with my open handsheld out, as if they contained the desperation of the case.  "I knownothing of his life.  It has almost made me mad to sit here of anight and see him before me, so bound up with my fortunes andmisfortunes, and yet so unknown to me, except as the miserablewretch who terrified me two days in my childhood!"

Herbert got up, and linked his arm in mine, and we slowly walked toand fro together, studying the carpet.

"Handel," said Herbert, stopping, "you feel convinced that you cantake no further benefits from him; do you?"

"Fully.  Surely you would, too, if you were in my place?"

"And you feel convinced that you must break with him?"

"Herbert, can you ask me?"

"And you have, and are bound to have, that tenderness for the lifehe has risked on your account, that you must save him, if possible,from throwing it away.  Then you must get him out of England beforeyou stir a finger to extricate yourself.  That done, extricateyourself, in Heaven's name, and we'll see it out together, dear oldboy."

It was a comfort to shake hands upon it, and walk up and downagain, with only that done.

"Now, Herbert," said I, "with reference to gaining some knowledgeof his history.  There is but one way that I know of.  I must ask himpoint blank."

"Yes.  Ask him," said Herbert, "when we sit at breakfast in themorning."  For he had said, on taking leave of Herbert, that hewould come to breakfast with us.

With this project formed, we went to bed.  I had the wildest dreamsconcerning him, and woke unrefreshed; I woke, too, to recover thefear which I had lost in the night, of his being found out as areturned transport.  Waking, I never lost that fear.

He came round at the appointed time, took out his jackknife, andsat down to his meal.  He was full of plans "for his gentleman'scoming out strong, and like a gentleman," and urged me to beginspeedily upon the pocket-book which he had left in my possession.He considered the chambers and his own lodging as temporaryresidences, and advised me to look out at once for a "fashionablecrib" near Hyde Park, in which he could have "a shake-down."  Whenhe had made an end of his breakfast, and was wiping his knife onhis leg, I said to him, without a word of preface,--

"After you were gone last night, I told my friend of the strugglethat the soldiers found you engaged in on the marshes, when we cameup.  You remember?"

"Remember!" said he.  "I think so!"

"We want to know something about that man--and about you.  It isstrange to know no more about either, and particularly you, than Iwas able to tell last night.  Is not this as good a time as anotherfor our knowing more?"

"Well!" he said, after consideration.  "You're on your oath, youknow, Pip's comrade?"

"Assuredly," replied Herbert.

"As to anything I say, you know," he insisted.  "The oath applies toall."

"I understand it to do so."

"And look'ee here!  Wotever I done is worked out and paid for," heinsisted again.

"So be it."

He took out his black pipe and was going to fill it with negro-head,when, looking at the tangle of tobacco in his hand, he seemed tothink it might perplex the thread of his narrative.  He put it backagain, stuck his pipe in a button-hole of his coat, spread a handon each knee, and after turning an angry eye on the fire for a fewsilent moments, looked round at us and said what follows.

Chapter XLII

"Dear boy and Pip's comrade.  I am not a going fur to tell you mylife like a song, or a story-book.  But to give it you short andhandy, I'll put it at once into a mouthful of English.  In jail andout of jail, in jail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail.There, you've got it.  That's my life pretty much, down to such timesas I got shipped off, arter Pip stood my friend.

"I've been done everything to, pretty well--except hanged.  I'vebeen locked up as much as a silver tea-kittle.  I've been cartedhere and carted there, and put out of this town, and put out of thattown, and stuck in the stocks, and whipped and worried and drove.I've no more notion where I was born than you have--if so much.  Ifirst become aware of myself down in Essex, a thieving turnips formy living.  Summun had run away from me--a man--a tinker--andhe'd took the fire with him, and left me wery cold.

"I know'd my name to be Magwitch, chrisen'd Abel.  How did I knowit?  Much as I know'd the birds' names in the hedges to bechaffinch, sparrer, thrush.  I might have thought it was all liestogether, only as the birds' names come out true, I supposed minedid.

"So fur as I could find, there warn't a soul that see young AbelMagwitch, with us little on him as in him, but wot caught fright athim, and either drove him off, or took him up.  I was took up, tookup, took up, to that extent that I reg'larly grow'd up took up.

"This is the way it was, that when I was a ragged little creetur asmuch to be pitied as ever I see (not that I looked in the glass,for there warn't many insides of furnished houses known to me), Igot the name of being hardened.  "This is a terrible hardened one,"they says to prison wisitors, picking out me.  "May be said to livein jails, this boy.  "Then they looked at me, and I looked at them,and they measured my head, some on 'em,--they had better a measuredmy stomach,--and others on 'em giv me tracts what I couldn't read,and made me speeches what I couldn't understand.  They always wenton agen me about the Devil.  But what the Devil was I to do?  I mustput something into my stomach, mustn't I?--Howsomever, I'm agetting low, and I know what's due.  Dear boy and Pip's comrade,don't you be afeerd of me being low.

"Tramping, begging, thieving, working sometimes when I could,--though that warn't as often as you may think, till you put thequestion whether you would ha' been over-ready to give me workyourselves,--a bit of a poacher, a bit of a laborer, a bit of awagoner, a bit of a haymaker, a bit of a hawker, a bit of mostthings that don't pay and lead to trouble, I got to be a man.  Adeserting soldier in a Traveller's Rest, what lay hid up to thechin under a lot of taturs, learnt me to read; and a travellingGiant what signed his name at a penny a time learnt me to write.  Iwarn't locked up as often now as formerly, but I wore out my goodshare of key-metal still.

"At Epsom races, a matter of over twenty years ago, I gotacquainted wi' a man whose skull I'd crack wi' this poker, like theclaw of a lobster, if I'd got it on this hob.  His right name wasCompeyson; and that's the man, dear boy, what you see me a poundingin the ditch, according to what you truly told your comrade arter Iwas gone last night.

"He set up fur a gentleman, this Compeyson, and he'd been to apublic boarding-school and had learning.  He was a smooth one totalk, and was a dab at the ways of gentlefolks.  He was good-looking too.  It was the night afore the great race, when Ifound him on the heath, in a booth that I know'd on.  Him and somemore was a sitting among the tables when I went in, and thelandlord (which had a knowledge of me, and was a sporting one)called him out, and said, 'I think this is a man that might suityou,'--meaning I was.

"Compeyson, he looks at me very noticing, and I look at him.  He hasa watch and a chain and a ring and a breast-pin and a handsome suitof clothes.

"'To judge from appearances, you're out of luck,' says Compeyson tome.

"'Yes, master, and I've never been in it much.'  (I had come out ofKingston Jail last on a vagrancy committal.  Not but what it mighthave been for something else; but it warn't.)

"'Luck changes,' says Compeyson; 'perhaps yours is going to change.'

"I says, 'I hope it may be so.  There's room.'

"'What can you do?' says Compeyson.

"'Eat and drink,' I says; 'if you'll find the materials.'

"Compeyson laughed, looked at me again very noticing, giv me fiveshillings, and appointed me for next night.  Same place.

"I went to Compeyson next night, same place, and Compeyson took meon to be his man and pardner.  And what was Compeyson's business inwhich we was to go pardners?  Compeyson's business was theswindling, handwriting forging, stolen bank-note passing, andsuch-like.  All sorts of traps as Compeyson could set with his head,and keep his own legs out of and get the profits from and letanother man in for, was Compeyson's business.  He'd no more heartthan a iron file, he was as cold as death, and he had the head ofthe Devil afore mentioned.

"There was another in with Compeyson, as was called Arthur,--not asbeing so chrisen'd, but as a surname.  He was in a Decline, and wasa shadow to look at.  Him and Compeyson had been in a bad thing witha rich lady some years afore, and they'd made a pot of money by it;but Compeyson betted and gamed, and he'd have run through theking's taxes.  So, Arthur was a dying, and a dying poor and with thehorrors on him, and Compeyson's wife (which Compeyson kickedmostly) was a having pity on him when she could, and Compeyson wasa having pity on nothing and nobody.

"I might a took warning by Arthur, but I didn't; and I won'tpretend I was partick'ler--for where 'ud be the good on it, dearboy and comrade?  So I begun wi' Compeyson, and a poor tool I was inhis hands.  Arthur lived at the top of Compeyson's house (over nighBrentford it was), and Compeyson kept a careful account agen himfor board and lodging, in case he should ever get better to work itout.  But Arthur soon settled the account.  The second or third timeas ever I see him, he come a tearing down into Compeyson's parlorlate at night, in only a flannel gown, with his hair all in asweat, and he says to Compeyson's wife, 'Sally, she really isupstairs alonger me, now, and I can't get rid of her.  She's all inwhite,' he says, 'wi' white flowers in her hair, and she's awfulmad, and she's got a shroud hanging over her arm, and she saysshe'll put it on me at five in the morning.'

"Says Compeyson:  'Why, you fool, don't you know she's got a livingbody?  And how should she be up there, without coming through thedoor, or in at the window, and up the stairs?'

"'I don't know how she's there,' says Arthur, shivering dreadfulwith the horrors, 'but she's standing in the corner at the foot ofthe bed, awful mad.  And over where her heart's broke--you brokeit!--there's drops of blood.'

"Compeyson spoke hardy, but he was always a coward.  'Go up alongerthis drivelling sick man,' he says to his wife, 'and Magwitch, lendher a hand, will you?'  But he never come nigh himself.

"Compeyson's wife and me took him up to bed agen, and he raved mostdreadful.  'Why look at her!' he cries out.  'She's a shaking theshroud at me!  Don't you see her?  Look at her eyes!  Ain't it awful tosee her so mad?'  Next he cries, 'She'll put it on me, and then I'mdone for!  Take it away from her, take it away!'  And then he catchedhold of us, and kep on a talking to her, and answering of her, tillI half believed I see her myself.

"Compeyson's wife, being used to him, giv him some liquor to getthe horrors off, and by and by he quieted.  'O, she's gone!  Has herkeeper been for her?' he says.  'Yes,' says Compeyson's wife.  'Didyou tell him to lock her and bar her in?' 'Yes.'  'And to take thatugly thing away from her?' 'Yes, yes, all right.' 'You're a goodcreetur,' he says, 'don't leave me, whatever you do, and thankyou!'

"He rested pretty quiet till it might want a few minutes of five,and then he starts up with a scream, and screams out, 'Here sheis!  She's got the shroud again.  She's unfolding it.  She's coming outof the corner.  She's coming to the bed.  Hold me, both on you--oneof each side--don't let her touch me with it.  Hah! she missed methat time.  Don't let her throw it over my shoulders.  Don't let herlift me up to get it round me.  She's lifting me up.  Keep me down!'Then he lifted himself up hard, and was dead.

"Compeyson took it easy as a good riddance for both sides.  Him andme was soon busy, and first he swore me (being ever artful) on myown book,--this here little black book, dear boy, what I swore yourcomrade on.

"Not to go into the things that Compeyson planned, and I done--which 'ud take a week--I'll simply say to you, dear boy, and Pip'scomrade, that that man got me into such nets as made me his blackslave.  I was always in debt to him, always under his thumb, alwaysa working, always a getting into danger.  He was younger than me,but he'd got craft, and he'd got learning, and he overmatched mefive hundred times told and no mercy.  My Missis as I had the hardtime wi'--Stop though!  I ain't brought her in--"

He looked about him in a confused way, as if he had lost his placein the book of his remembrance; and he turned his face to the fire,and spread his hands broader on his knees, and lifted them off andput them on again.

"There ain't no need to go into it," he said, looking round oncemore.  "The time wi' Compeyson was a'most as hard a time as ever Ihad; that said, all's said.  Did I tell you as I was tried, alone,for misdemeanor, while with Compeyson?"

I answered, No.

"Well!" he said, "I was, and got convicted.  As to took up onsuspicion, that was twice or three times in the four or five yearthat it lasted; but evidence was wanting.  At last, me and Compeysonwas both committed for felony,--on a charge of putting stolen notesin circulation,--and there was other charges behind.  Compeyson saysto me, 'Separate defences, no communication,' and that was all.  AndI was so miserable poor, that I sold all the clothes I had, exceptwhat hung on my back, afore I could get Jaggers.

"When we was put in the dock, I noticed first of all what agentleman Compeyson looked, wi' his curly hair and his blackclothes and his white pocket-handkercher, and what a common sort ofa wretch I looked.  When the prosecution opened and the evidence wasput short, aforehand, I noticed how heavy it all bore on me, andhow light on him.  When the evidence was giv in the box, I noticedhow it was always me that had come for'ard, and could be swore to,how it was always me that the money had been paid to, how it wasalways me that had seemed to work the thing and get the profit.But when the defence come on, then I see the plan plainer; for,says the counsellor for Compeyson, 'My lord and gentlemen, here youhas afore you, side by side, two persons as your eyes can separatewide; one, the younger, well brought up, who will be spoke to assuch; one, the elder, ill brought up, who will be spoke to as such;one, the younger, seldom if ever seen in these here transactions,and only suspected; t'other, the elder, always seen in 'em andalways wi'his guilt brought home.  Can you doubt, if there is butone in it, which is the one, and, if there is two in it, which ismuch the worst one?'  And such-like.  And when it come to character,warn't it Compeyson as had been to the school, and warn't it hisschoolfellows as was in this position and in that, and warn't ithim as had been know'd by witnesses in such clubs and societies,and nowt to his disadvantage?  And warn't it me as had been triedafore, and as had been know'd up hill and down dale in Bridewellsand Lock-Ups!  And when it come to speech-making, warn't itCompeyson as could speak to 'em wi' his face dropping every now andthen into his white pocket-handkercher,--ah! and wi' verses in hisspeech, too,--and warn't it me as could only say, 'Gentlemen, thisman at my side is a most precious rascal'?  And when the verdictcome, warn't it Compeyson as was recommended to mercy on account ofgood character and bad company, and giving up all the informationhe could agen me, and warn't it me as got never a word but Guilty?And when I says to Compeyson, 'Once out of this court, I'll smashthat face of yourn!' ain't it Compeyson as prays the Judge to beprotected, and gets two turnkeys stood betwixt us?  And when we'resentenced, ain't it him as gets seven year, and me fourteen, andain't it him as the Judge is sorry for, because he might a done sowell, and ain't it me as the Judge perceives to be a old offenderof wiolent passion, likely to come to worse?"

He had worked himself into a state of great excitement, but hechecked it, took two or three short breaths, swallowed as often,and stretching out his hand towards me said, in a reassuringmanner, "I ain't a going to be low, dear boy!"

He had so heated himself that he took out his handkerchief andwiped his face and head and neck and hands, before he could go on.

"I had said to Compeyson that I'd smash that face of his, and Iswore Lord smash mine! to do it.  We was in the same prison-ship,but I couldn't get at him for long, though I tried.  At last I comebehind him and hit him on the cheek to turn him round and get asmashing one at him, when I was seen and seized.  The black-hole ofthat ship warn't a strong one, to a judge of black-holes that couldswim and dive.  I escaped to the shore, and I was a hiding among thegraves there, envying them as was in 'em and all over, when I firstsee my boy!"

He regarded me with a look of affection that made him almostabhorrent to me again, though I had felt great pity for him.

"By my boy, I was giv to understand as Compeyson was out on themmarshes too.  Upon my soul, I half believe he escaped in his terror,to get quit of me, not knowing it was me as had got ashore.  Ihunted him down.  I smashed his face.  'And now,' says I 'as theworst thing I can do, caring nothing for myself, I'll drag youback.'  And I'd have swum off, towing him by the hair, if it hadcome to that, and I'd a got him aboard without the soldiers.

"Of course he'd much the best of it to the last,--his character wasso good.  He had escaped when he was made half wild by me and mymurderous intentions; and his punishment was light.  I was put inirons, brought to trial again, and sent for life.  I didn't stop forlife, dear boy and Pip's comrade, being here."

"He wiped himself again, as he had done before, and then slowlytook his tangle of tobacco from his pocket, and plucked his pipefrom his button-hole, and slowly filled it, and began to smoke.

"Is he dead?" I asked, after a silence.

"Is who dead, dear boy?"

"Compeyson."

"He hopes I am, if he's alive, you may be sure," with a fiercelook.  "I never heerd no more of him."

Herbert had been writing with his pencil in the cover of a book.  Hesoftly pushed the book over to me, as Provis stood smoking with hiseyes on the fire, and I read in it:--

"Young Havisham's name was Arthur.  Compeyson is the man whoprofessed to be Miss Havisham's lover."

I shut the book and nodded slightly to Herbert, and put the bookby; but we neither of us said anything, and both looked at Provisas he stood smoking by the fire.

Chapter XLIII

Why should I pause to ask how much of my shrinking from Provismight be traced to Estella?  Why should I loiter on my road, tocompare the state of mind in which I had tried to rid myself of thestain of the prison before meeting her at the coach-office, withthe state of mind in which I now reflected on the abyss betweenEstella in her pride and beauty, and the returned transport whom Iharbored?  The road would be none the smoother for it, the endwould be none the better for it, he would not be helped, nor Iextenuated.

A new fear had been engendered in my mind by his narrative; orrather, his narrative had given form and purpose to the fear thatwas already there.  If Compeyson were alive and should discover hisreturn, I could hardly doubt the consequence.  That, Compeyson stoodin mortal fear of him, neither of the two could know much betterthan I; and that any such man as that man had been described tobe would hesitate to release himself for good from a dreaded enemyby the safe means of becoming an informer was scarcely to beimagined.

Never had I breathed, and never would I breathe--or so I resolved--a word of Estella to Provis.  But, I said to Herbert that, before Icould go abroad, I must see both Estella and Miss Havisham.  Thiswas when we were left alone on the night of the day when Provistold us his story.  I resolved to go out to Richmond next day, and Iwent.

On my presenting myself at Mrs. Brandley's, Estella's maid wascalled to tell that Estella had gone into the country.  Where?  ToSatis House, as usual.  Not as usual, I said, for she had never yetgone there without me; when was she coming back?  There was an airof reservation in the answer which increased my perplexity, and theanswer was, that her maid believed she was only coming back at allfor a little while.  I could make nothing of this, except that itwas meant that I should make nothing of it, and I went home againin complete discomfiture.

Another night consultation with Herbert after Provis was gone home(I always took him home, and always looked well about me), led usto the conclusion that nothing should be said about going abroaduntil I came back from Miss Havisham's.  In the mean time, Herbertand I were to consider separately what it would be best to say;whether we should devise any pretence of being afraid that he wasunder suspicious observation; or whether I, who had never yet beenabroad, should propose an expedition.  We both knew that I had butto propose anything, and he would consent.  We agreed that hisremaining many days in his present hazard was not to be thought of.

Next day I had the meanness to feign that I was under a bindingpromise to go down to Joe; but I was capable of almost any meannesstowards Joe or his name.  Provis was to be strictly careful while Iwas gone, and Herbert was to take the charge of him that I hadtaken.  I was to be absent only one night, and, on my return, thegratification of his impatience for my starting as a gentleman on agreater scale was to be begun.  It occurred to me then, and as Iafterwards found to Herbert also, that he might be best got awayacross the water, on that pretence,--as, to make purchases, or thelike.

Having thus cleared the way for my expedition to Miss Havisham's, Iset off by the early morning coach before it was yet light, and wasout on the open country road when the day came creeping on, haltingand whimpering and shivering, and wrapped in patches of cloud andrags of mist, like a beggar.  When we drove up to the Blue Boarafter a drizzly ride, whom should I see come out under the gateway,toothpick in hand, to look at the coach, but Bentley Drummle!

As he pretended not to see me, I pretended not to see him.  It was avery lame pretence on both sides; the lamer, because we both wentinto the coffee-room, where he had just finished his breakfast, andwhere I ordered mine.  It was poisonous to me to see him in thetown, for I very well knew why he had come there.

Pretending to read a smeary newspaper long out of date, which hadnothing half so legible in its local news, as the foreign matter ofcoffee, pickles, fish sauces, gravy, melted butter, and wine withwhich it was sprinkled all over, as if it had taken the measles ina highly irregular form, I sat at my table while he stood beforethe fire.  By degrees it became an enormous injury to me that hestood before the fire.  And I got up, determined to have my share ofit.  I had to put my hand behind his legs for the poker when I wentup to the fireplace to stir the fire, but still pretended not toknow him.

"Is this a cut?" said Mr. Drummle.

"Oh!" said I, poker in hand; "it's you, is it?  How do you do?  I waswondering who it was, who kept the fire off."

With that, I poked tremendously, and having done so, planted myselfside by side with Mr. Drummle, my shoulders squared and my back tothe fire.

"You have just come down?" said Mr. Drummle, edging me a little awaywith his shoulder.

"Yes," said I, edging him a little away with my shoulder.

"Beastly place," said Drummle.  "Your part of the country, Ithink?"

"Yes," I assented.  "I am told it's very like your Shropshire."

"Not in the least like it," said Drummle.

Here Mr. Drummle looked at his boots and I looked at mine, and thenMr. Drummle looked at my boots, and I looked at his.

"Have you been here long?" I asked, determined not to yield an inchof the fire.

"Long enough to be tired of it," returned Drummle, pretending toyawn, but equally determined.

"Do you stay here long?"

"Can't say," answered Mr. Drummle.  "Do you?"

"Can't say," said I.

I felt here, through a tingling in my blood, that if Mr. Drummle'sshoulder had claimed another hair's breadth of room, I should havejerked him into the window; equally, that if my own shoulder hadurged a similar claim, Mr. Drummle would have jerked me into thenearest box.  He whistled a little.  So did I.

"Large tract of marshes about here, I believe?" said Drummle.

"Yes.  What of that?" said I.

Mr. Drummle looked at me, and then at my boots, and then said, "Oh!"and laughed.

"Are you amused, Mr. Drummle?"

"No," said he, "not particularly.  I am going out for a ride in thesaddle.  I mean to explore those marshes for amusement.Out-of-the-way villages there, they tell me.  Curious littlepublic-houses--and smithies--and that.  Waiter!"

"Yes, sir."

"Is that horse of mine ready?"

"Brought round to the door, sir."

"I say.  Look here, you sir.  The lady won't ride to-day; the weatherwon't do."

"Very good, sir."

"And I don't dine, because I'm going to dine at the lady's."

"Very good, sir."

Then, Drummle glanced at me, with an insolent triumph on hisgreat-jowled face that cut me to the heart, dull as he was, and soexasperated me, that I felt inclined to take him in my arms (as therobber in the story-book is said to have taken the old lady) andseat him on the fire.

One thing was manifest to both of us, and that was, that untilrelief came, neither of us could relinquish the fire.  There westood, well squared up before it, shoulder to shoulder and foot tofoot, with our hands behind us, not budging an inch.  The horse wasvisible outside in the drizzle at the door, my breakfast was put onthe table, Drummle's was cleared away, the waiter invited me tobegin, I nodded, we both stood our ground.

"Have you been to the Grove since?" said Drummle.

"No," said I, "I had quite enough of the Finches the last time Iwas there."

"Was that when we had a difference of opinion?"

"Yes," I replied, very shortly.

"Come, come!  They let you off easily enough," sneered Drummle.  "Youshouldn't have lost your temper."

"Mr. Drummle," said I, "you are not competent to give advice on thatsubject.  When I lose my temper (not that I admit having done so onthat occasion), I don't throw glasses."

"I do," said Drummle.

After glancing at him once or twice, in an increased state ofsmouldering ferocity, I said,--

"Mr. Drummle, I did not seek this conversation, and I don't think itan agreeable one."

"I am sure it's not," said he, superciliously over his shoulder; "Idon't think anything about it."

"And therefore," I went on, "with your leave, I will suggest thatwe hold no kind of communication in future."

"Quite my opinion," said Drummle, "and what I should have suggestedmyself, or done--more likely--without suggesting.  But don't loseyour temper.  Haven't you lost enough without that?"

"What do you mean, sir?"

"Waiter!," said Drummle, by way of answering me.

The waiter reappeared.

"Look here, you sir.  You quite understand that the young lady don'tride to-day, and that I dine at the young lady's?"

"Quite so, sir!"

When the waiter had felt my fast-cooling teapot with the palm ofhis hand, and had looked imploringly at me, and had gone out,Drummle, careful not to move the shoulder next me, took a cigarfrom his pocket and bit the end off, but showed no sign ofstirring.  Choking and boiling as I was, I felt that we could not goa word further, without introducing Estella's name, which I couldnot endure to hear him utter; and therefore I looked stonily at theopposite wall, as if there were no one present, and forced myselfto silence.  How long we might have remained in this ridiculousposition it is impossible to say, but for the incursion of threethriving farmers--laid on by the waiter, I think--who came intothe coffee-room unbuttoning their great-coats and rubbing theirhands, and before whom, as they charged at the fire, we wereobliged to give way.

I saw him through the window, seizing his horse's mane, andmounting in his blundering brutal manner, and sidling and backingaway.  I thought he was gone, when he came back, calling for a lightfor the cigar in his mouth, which he had forgotten.  A man in adust-colored dress appeared with what was wanted,--I could not havesaid from where:  whether from the inn yard, or the street, or wherenot,--and as Drummle leaned down from the saddle and lighted hiscigar and laughed, with a jerk of his head towards the coffee-roomwindows, the slouching shoulders and ragged hair of this man whoseback was towards me reminded me of Orlick.

Too heavily out of sorts to care much at the time whether it werehe or no, or after all to touch the breakfast, I washed the weatherand the journey from my face and hands, and went out to thememorable old house that it would have been so much the better forme never to have entered, never to have seen.

Chapter XLIV

In the room where the dressing-table stood, and where the wax-candles burnt on the wall, I found Miss Havisham and Estella; MissHavisham seated on a settee near the fire, and Estella on a cushionat her feet.  Estella was knitting, and Miss Havisham was lookingon.  They both raised their eyes as I went in, and both saw analteration in me.  I derived that, from the look they interchanged.

"And what wind," said Miss Havisham, "blows you here, Pip?"

Though she looked steadily at me, I saw that she was ratherconfused.  Estella, pausing a moment in her knitting with her eyesupon me, and then going on, I fancied that I read in the action ofher fingers, as plainly as if she had told me in the dumb alphabet,that she perceived I had discovered my real benefactor.

"Miss Havisham," said I, "I went to Richmond yesterday, to speak toEstella; and finding that some wind had blown her here, Ifollowed."

Miss Havisham motioning to me for the third or fourth time to sitdown, I took the chair by the dressing-table, which I had oftenseen her occupy.  With all that ruin at my feet and about me, itseemed a natural place for me, that day.

"What I had to say to Estella, Miss Havisham, I will say beforeyou, presently--in a few moments.  It will not surprise you, itwill not displease you.  I am as unhappy as you can ever have meantme to be."

Miss Havisham continued to look steadily at me.  I could see in theaction of Estella's fingers as they worked that she attended towhat I said; but she did not look up.

"I have found out who my patron is.  It is not a fortunatediscovery, and is not likely ever to enrich me in reputation,station, fortune, anything.  There are reasons why I must say nomore of that.  It is not my secret, but another's."

As I was silent for a while, looking at Estella and considering howto go on, Miss Havisham repeated, "It is not your secret, butanother's.  Well?"

"When you first caused me to be brought here, Miss Havisham, when Ibelonged to the village over yonder, that I wish I had never left,I suppose I did really come here, as any other chance boy mighthave come,--as a kind of servant, to gratify a want or a whim, andto be paid for it?"

"Ay, Pip," replied Miss Havisham, steadily nodding her head; "youdid."

"And that Mr. Jaggers--"

"Mr. Jaggers," said Miss Havisham, taking me up in a firm tone, "hadnothing to do with it, and knew nothing of it.  His being my lawyer,and his being the lawyer of your patron is a coincidence.  He holdsthe same relation towards numbers of people, and it might easilyarise.  Be that as it may, it did arise, and was not brought aboutby any one."

Any one might have seen in her haggard face that there was nosuppression or evasion so far.

"But when I fell into the mistake I have so long remained in, atleast you led me on?" said I.

"Yes," she returned, again nodding steadily, "I let you go on."

"Was that kind?"

"Who am I," cried Miss Havisham, striking her stick upon the floorand flashing into wrath so suddenly that Estella glanced up at herin surprise,--"who am I, for God's sake, that I should be kind?"

It was a weak complaint to have made, and I had not meant to makeit.  I told her so, as she sat brooding after this outburst.

"Well, well, well!" she said.  "What else?"

"I was liberally paid for my old attendance here," I said, tosoothe her, "in being apprenticed, and I have asked these questionsonly for my own information.  What follows has another (and I hopemore disinterested) purpose.  In humoring my mistake, MissHavisham, you punished--practised on--perhaps you will supplywhatever term expresses your intention, without offence--yourself-seeking relations?"

"I did.  Why, they would have it so!  So would you.  What has been myhistory, that I should be at the pains of entreating either themor you not to have it so!  You made your own snares.  I never madethem."

Waiting until she was quiet again,--for this, too, flashed out ofher in a wild and sudden way,--I went on.

"I have been thrown among one family of your relations, MissHavisham, and have been constantly among them since I went toLondon.  I know them to have been as honestly under my delusion as Imyself.  And I should be false and base if I did not tell you,whether it is acceptable to you or no, and whether you are inclinedto give credence to it or no, that you deeply wrong both Mr. MatthewPocket and his son Herbert, if you suppose them to be otherwisethan generous, upright, open, and incapable of anything designingor mean."

"They are your friends," said Miss Havisham.

"They made themselves my friends," said I, "when they supposed meto have superseded them; and when Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, andMistress Camilla were not my friends, I think."

This contrasting of them with the rest seemed, I was glad to see,to do them good with her.  She looked at me keenly for a littlewhile, and then said quietly,--

"What do you want for them?"

"Only," said I, "that you would not confound them with the others.They may be of the same blood, but, believe me, they are not of thesame nature."

Still looking at me keenly, Miss Havisham repeated,--

"What do you want for them?"

"I am not so cunning, you see," I said, in answer, conscious that Ireddened a little, "as that I could hide from you, even if Idesired, that I do want something.  Miss Havisham, if you wouldspare the money to do my friend Herbert a lasting service in life,but which from the nature of the case must be done without hisknowledge, I could show you how."

"Why must it be done without his knowledge?" she asked, settlingher hands upon her stick, that she might regard me the moreattentively.

"Because," said I, "I began the service myself, more than two yearsago, without his knowledge, and I don't want to be betrayed.  Why Ifail in my ability to finish it, I cannot explain.  It is a part ofthe secret which is another person's and not mine."

She gradually withdrew her eyes from me, and turned them on thefire.  After watching it for what appeared in the silence and by thelight of the slowly wasting candles to be a long time, she wasroused by the collapse of some of the red coals, and looked towardsme again--at first, vacantly--then, with a graduallyconcentrating attention.  All this time Estella knitted on.  WhenMiss Havisham had fixed her attention on me, she said, speaking asif there had been no lapse in our dialogue,--

"What else?"

"Estella," said I, turning to her now, and trying to command mytrembling voice, "you know I love you.  You know that I have lovedyou long and dearly."

She raised her eyes to my face, on being thus addressed, and herfingers plied their work, and she looked at me with an unmovedcountenance.  I saw that Miss Havisham glanced from me to her, andfrom her to me.

"I should have said this sooner, but for my long mistake.  Itinduced me to hope that Miss Havisham meant us for one another.While I thought you could not help yourself, as it were, Irefrained from saying it.  But I must say it now."

Preserving her unmoved countenance, and with her fingers stillgoing, Estella shook her head.

"I know," said I, in answer to that action,--"I know.  I have no hopethat I shall ever call you mine, Estella.  I am ignorant what maybecome of me very soon, how poor I may be, or where I may go.Still, I love you.  I have loved you ever since I first saw you inthis house."

Looking at me perfectly unmoved and with her fingers busy, sheshook her head again.

"It would have been cruel in Miss Havisham, horribly cruel, topractise on the susceptibility of a poor boy, and to torture methrough all these years with a vain hope and an idle pursuit, ifshe had reflected on the gravity of what she did.  But I think shedid not.  I think that, in the endurance of her own trial, she forgotmine, Estella."

I saw Miss Havisham put her hand to her heart and hold it there, asshe sat looking by turns at Estella and at me.

"It seems," said Estella, very calmly, "that there are sentiments,fancies,--I don't know how to call them,--which I am not able tocomprehend.  When you say you love me, I know what you mean, as aform of words; but nothing more.  You address nothing in my breast,you touch nothing there.  I don't care for what you say at all.  Ihave tried to warn you of this; now, have I not?"

I said in a miserable manner, "Yes."

"Yes.  But you would not be warned, for you thought I did not meanit.  Now, did you not think so?"

"I thought and hoped you could not mean it.  You, so young, untried,and beautiful, Estella!  Surely it is not in Nature."

"It is in my nature," she returned.  And then she added, with astress upon the words, "It is in the nature formed within me.  Imake a great difference between you and all other people when I sayso much.  I can do no more."

"Is it not true," said I, "that Bentley Drummle is in town here,and pursuing you?"

"It is quite true," she replied, referring to him with theindifference of utter contempt.

"That you encourage him, and ride out with him, and that he dineswith you this very day?"

She seemed a little surprised that I should know it, but againreplied, "Quite true."

"You cannot love him, Estella!"

Her fingers stopped for the first time, as she retorted ratherangrily, "What have I told you?  Do you still think, in spite of it,that I do not mean what I say?"

"You would never marry him, Estella?"

She looked towards Miss Havisham, and considered for a moment withher work in her hands.  Then she said, "Why not tell you the truth?I am going to be married to him."

I dropped my face into my hands, but was able to control myselfbetter than I could have expected, considering what agony it gaveme to hear her say those words.  When I raised my face again, therewas such a ghastly look upon Miss Havisham's, that it impressed me,even in my passionate hurry and grief.

"Estella, dearest Estella, do not let Miss Havisham leadyou into this fatal step.  Put me aside for ever,--you have done so,I well know,--but bestow yourself on some worthier person thanDrummle.  Miss Havisham gives you to him, as the greatest slight andinjury that could be done to the many far better men who admireyou, and to the few who truly love you.  Among those few there maybe one who loves you even as dearly, though he has not loved you aslong, as I.  Take him, and I can bear it better, for your sake!"

My earnestness awoke a wonder in her that seemed as if it wouldhave been touched with compassion, if she could have rendered me atall intelligible to her own mind.

"I am going," she said again, in a gentler voice, "to be married tohim.  The preparations for my marriage are making, and I shall bemarried soon.  Why do you injuriously introduce the name of mymother by adoption?  It is my own act."

"Your own act, Estella, to fling yourself away upon a brute?"

"On whom should I fling myself away?" she retorted, with a smile."Should I fling myself away upon the man who would the soonest feel(if people do feel such things) that I took nothing to him?  There!It is done.  I shall do well enough, and so will my husband.  As toleading me into what you call this fatal step, Miss Havisham wouldhave had me wait, and not marry yet; but I am tired of the life Ihave led, which has very few charms for me, and I am willing enoughto change it.  Say no more.  We shall never understand each other."

"Such a mean brute, such a stupid brute!" I urged, in despair.

"Don't be afraid of my being a blessing to him," said Estella; "Ishall not be that.  Come!  Here is my hand.  Do we part on this, youvisionary boy--or man?"

"O Estella!" I answered, as my bitter tears fell fast on her hand,do what I would to restrain them; "even if I remained in Englandand could hold my head up with the rest, how could I see youDrummle's wife?"

"Nonsense," she returned,--"nonsense.  This will pass in no time."

"Never, Estella!"

"You will get me out of your thoughts in a week."

"Out of my thoughts!  You are part of my existence, part of myself.You have been in every line I have ever read since I first camehere, the rough common boy whose poor heart you wounded even then.You have been in every prospect I have ever seen since,--on theriver, on the sails of the ships, on the marshes, in the clouds, inthe light, in the darkness, in the wind, in the woods, in the sea,in the streets.  You have been the embodiment of every gracefulfancy that my mind has ever become acquainted with.  The stones ofwhich the strongest London buildings are made are not more real,or more impossible to be displaced by your hands, than yourpresence and influence have been to me, there and everywhere, andwill be.  Estella, to the last hour of my life, you cannot choosebut remain part of my character, part of the little good in me,part of the evil.  But, in this separation, I associate you only withthe good; and I will faithfully hold you to that always, for youmust have done me far more good than harm, let me feel now whatsharp distress I may.  O God bless you, God forgive you!"

In what ecstasy of unhappiness I got these broken words out ofmyself, I don't know.  The rhapsody welled up within me, like bloodfrom an inward wound, and gushed out.  I held her hand to my lipssome lingering moments, and so I left her.  But ever afterwards, Iremembered,--and soon afterwards with stronger reason,--that whileEstella looked at me merely with incredulous wonder, the spectralfigure of Miss Havisham, her hand still covering her heart, seemedall resolved into a ghastly stare of pity and remorse.

All done, all gone!  So much was done and gone, that when I went outat the gate, the light of the day seemed of a darker color thanwhen I went in.  For a while, I hid myself among some lanes andby-paths, and then struck off to walk all the way to London.  For, Ihad by that time come to myself so far as to consider that I couldnot go back to the inn and see Drummle there; that I could not bearto sit upon the coach and be spoken to; that I could do nothinghalf so good for myself as tire myself out.

It was past midnight when I crossed London Bridge.  Pursuing thenarrow intricacies of the streets which at that time tendedwestward near the Middlesex shore of the river, my readiest accessto the Temple was close by the river-side, through Whitefriars.  Iwas not expected till to-morrow; but I had my keys, and, if Herbertwere gone to bed, could get to bed myself without disturbing him.

As it seldom happened that I came in at that Whitefriars gate afterthe Temple was closed, and as I was very muddy and weary, I did nottake it ill that the night-porter examined me with much attentionas he held the gate a little way open for me to pass in.  To helphis memory I mentioned my name.

"I was not quite sure, sir, but I thought so.  Here's a note, sir.The messenger that brought it, said would you be so good as read itby my lantern?"

Much surprised by the request, I took the note.  It was directed toPhilip Pip, Esquire, and on the top of the superscription were thewords, "PLEASE READ THIS, HERE."  I opened it, the watchman holdingup his light, and read inside, in Wemmick's writing,--

"DON'T GO HOME."

Chapter XLV

Turning from the Temple gate as soon as I had read the warning, Imade the best of my way to Fleet Street, and there got a latehackney chariot and drove to the Hummums in Covent Garden.  In thosetimes a bed was always to be got there at any hour of the night,and the chamberlain, letting me in at his ready wicket, lighted thecandle next in order on his shelf, and showed me straight into thebedroom next in order on his list.  It was a sort of vault on theground floor at the back, with a despotic monster of a four-postbedstead in it, straddling over the whole place, putting one of hisarbitrary legs into the fireplace and another into the doorway,and squeezing the wretched little washing-stand in quite a DivinelyRighteous manner.

As I had asked for a night-light, the chamberlain had brought mein, before he left me, the good old constitutional rushlight ofthose virtuous days.--an object like the ghost of a walking-cane,which instantly broke its back if it were touched, which nothingcould ever be lighted at, and which was placed in solitaryconfinement at the bottom of a high tin tower, perforated withround holes that made a staringly wide-awake pattern on the walls.When I had got into bed, and lay there footsore, weary, andwretched, I found that I could no more close my own eyes than Icould close the eyes of this foolish Argus.  And thus, in the gloomand death of the night, we stared at one another.

What a doleful night!  How anxious, how dismal, how long!  There wasan inhospitable smell in the room, of cold soot and hot dust; and,as I looked up into the corners of the tester over my head, Ithought what a number of blue-bottle flies from the butchers', andearwigs from the market, and grubs from the country, must beholding on up there, lying by for next summer.  This led me tospeculate whether any of them ever tumbled down, and then I fanciedthat I felt light falls on my face,--a disagreeable turn of thought,suggesting other and more objectionable approaches up my back.  WhenI had lain awake a little while, those extraordinary voices withwhich silence teems began to make themselves audible.  The closetwhispered, the fireplace sighed, the little washing-stand ticked,and one guitar-string played occasionally in the chest of drawers.At about the same time, the eyes on the wall acquired a newexpression, and in every one of those staring rounds I sawwritten, DON'T GO HOME.

Whatever night-fancies and night-noises crowded on me, they neverwarded off this DON'T GO HOME.  It plaited itself into whatever Ithought of, as a bodily pain would have done.  Not long before, Ihad read in the newspapers, how a gentleman unknown had come to theHummums in the night, and had gone to bed, and had destroyedhimself, and had been found in the morning weltering in blood.  Itcame into my head that he must have occupied this very vault ofmine, and I got out of bed to assure myself that there were no redmarks about; then opened the door to look out into the passages,and cheer myself with the companionship of a distant light, nearwhich I knew the chamberlain to be dozing.  But all this time, why Iwas not to go home, and what had happened at home, and when Ishould go home, and whether Provis was safe at home, were questionsoccupying my mind so busily, that one might have supposed therecould be no more room in it for any other theme.  Even when Ithought of Estella, and how we had parted that day forever, andwhen I recalled all the circumstances of our parting, and all herlooks and tones, and the action of her fingers while she knitted,--even then I was pursuing, here and there and everywhere, thecaution, Don't go home.  When at last I dozed, in sheer exhaustion ofmind and body, it became a vast shadowy verb which I had toconjugate.  Imperative mood, present tense:  Do not thou go home, lethim not go home, let us not go home, do not ye or you go home, letnot them go home.  Then potentially:  I may not and I cannot gohome; and I might not, could not, would not, and should not gohome; until I felt that I was going distracted, and rolled over onthe pillow, and looked at the staring rounds upon the wall again.

I had left directions that I was to be called at seven; for it wasplain that I must see Wemmick before seeing any one else, andequally plain that this was a case in which his Walworthsentiments only could be taken.  It was a relief to get out of theroom where the night had been so miserable, and I needed no secondknocking at the door to startle me from my uneasy bed.

The Castle battlements arose upon my view at eight o'clock.  Thelittle servant happening to be entering the fortress with two hotrolls, I passed through the postern and crossed the drawbridge inher company, and so came without announcement into the presence ofWemmick as he was making tea for himself and the Aged.  An open doorafforded a perspective view of the Aged in bed.

"Halloa, Mr. Pip!" said Wemmick.  "You did come home, then?"

"Yes," I returned; "but I didn't go home."

"That's all right," said he, rubbing his hands.  "I left a note foryou at each of the Temple gates, on the chance.  Which gate did youcome to?"

I told him.

"I'll go round to the others in the course of the day and destroythe notes," said Wemmick; "it's a good rule never to leavedocumentary evidence if you can help it, because you don't knowwhen it may be put in.  I'm going to take a liberty with you.  Would you mind toasting this sausage for the Aged P.?"

I said I should be delighted to do it.

"Then you can go about your work, Mary Anne," said Wemmick to thelittle servant; "which leaves us to ourselves, don't you see, Mr.Pip?" he added, winking, as she disappeared.

I thanked him for his friendship and caution, and our discourseproceeded in a low tone, while I toasted the Aged's sausage and hebuttered the crumb of the Aged's roll.

"Now, Mr. Pip, you know," said Wemmick, "you and I understand oneanother.  We are in our private and personal capacities, and we havebeen engaged in a confidential transaction before to-day.  Officialsentiments are one thing.  We are extra official."

I cordially assented.  I was so very nervous, that I had alreadylighted the Aged's sausage like a torch, and been obliged to blowit out.

"I accidentally heard, yesterday morning," said Wemmick, "being ina certain place where I once took you,--even between you and me,it's as well not to mention names when avoidable--"

"Much better not," said I.  "I understand you."

"I heard there by chance, yesterday morning," said Wemmick, "that acertain person not altogether of uncolonial pursuits, and notunpossessed of portable property,--I don't know who it may reallybe,--we won't name this person--"

"Not necessary," said I.

"--Had made some little stir in a certain part of the world wherea good many people go, not always in gratification of their owninclinations, and not quite irrespective of the governmentexpense--"

In watching his face, I made quite a firework of the Aged'ssausage, and greatly discomposed both my own attention andWemmick's; for which I apologized.

"--By disappearing from such place, and being no more heard ofthereabouts.  From which," said Wemmick, "conjectures had beenraised and theories formed.  I also heard that you at your chambersin Garden Court, Temple, had been watched, and might be watchedagain."

"By whom?" said I.

"I wouldn't go into that," said Wemmick, evasively, "it might clashwith official responsibilities.  I heard it, as I have in my timeheard other curious things in the same place.  I don't tell it youon information received.  I heard it."

He took the toasting-fork and sausage from me as he spoke, and setforth the Aged's breakfast neatly on a little tray.  Previous toplacing it before him, he went into the Aged's room with a cleanwhite cloth, and tied the same under the old gentleman's chin, andpropped him up, and put his nightcap on one side, and gave himquite a rakish air.  Then he placed his breakfast before him withgreat care, and said, "All right, ain't you, Aged P.?"  To which thecheerful Aged replied, "All right, John, my boy, all right!"  Asthere seemed to be a tacit understanding that the Aged was not in apresentable state, and was therefore to be considered invisible, Imade a pretence of being in complete ignorance of theseproceedings.

"This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reasonto suspect)," I said to Wemmick when he came back, "is inseparablefrom the person to whom you have adverted; is it?"

Wemmick looked very serious.  "I couldn't undertake to say that, ofmy own knowledge.  I mean, I couldn't undertake to say it was atfirst.  But it either is, or it will be, or it's in great danger ofbeing."

As I saw that he was restrained by fealty to Little Britain fromsaying as much as he could, and as I knew with thankfulness to himhow far out of his way he went to say what he did, I could notpress him.  But I told him, after a little meditation over the fire,that I would like to ask him a question, subject to his answeringor not answering, as he deemed right, and sure that his coursewould be right.  He paused in his breakfast, and crossing his arms,and pinching his shirt-sleeves (his notion of in-door comfort was tosit without any coat), he nodded to me once, to put my question.

"You have heard of a man of bad character, whose true name isCompeyson?"

He answered with one other nod.

"Is he living?"

One other nod.

"Is he in London?"

He gave me one other nod, compressed the post-office exceedingly,gave me one last nod, and went on with his breakfast.

"Now," said Wemmick, "questioning being over," which he emphasizedand repeated for my guidance, "I come to what I did, after hearingwhat I heard.  I went to Garden Court to find you; not finding you,I went to Clarriker's to find Mr. Herbert."

"And him you found?" said I, with great anxiety.

"And him I found.  Without mentioning any names or going into anydetails, I gave him to understand that if he was aware of anybody--Tom, Jack, or Richard--being about the chambers, or about theimmediate neighborhood, he had better get Tom, Jack, or Richardout of the way while you were out of the way."

"He would be greatly puzzled what to do?"

"He was puzzled what to do; not the less, because I gave him myopinion that it was not safe to try to get Tom, Jack, or Richardtoo far out of the way at present.  Mr. Pip, I'll tell you something.Under existing circumstances, there is no place like a great citywhen you are once in it.  Don't break cover too soon.  Lie close.Wait till things slacken, before you try the open, even for foreignair."

I thanked him for his valuable advice, and asked him what Herberthad done?

"Mr. Herbert," said Wemmick, "after being all of a heap for half anhour, struck out a plan.  He mentioned to me as a secret, that he iscourting a young lady who has, as no doubt you are aware, abedridden Pa.  Which Pa, having been in the Purser line of life,lies a-bed in a bow-window where he can see the ships sail up anddown the river.  You are acquainted with the young lady, mostprobably?"

"Not personally," said I.

The truth was, that she had objected to me as an expensivecompanion who did Herbert no good, and that, when Herbert had firstproposed to present me to her, she had received the proposal withsuch very moderate warmth, that Herbert had felt himself obliged toconfide the state of the case to me, with a view to the lapse of alittle time before I made her acquaintance.  When I had begun toadvance Herbert's prospects by stealth, I had been able to bearthis with cheerful philosophy:  he and his affianced, for theirpart, had naturally not been very anxious to introduce a thirdperson into their interviews; and thus, although I was assured thatI had risen in Clara's esteem, and although the young lady and Ihad long regularly interchanged messages and remembrances byHerbert, I had never seen her.  However, I did not trouble Wemmickwith these particulars.

"The house with the bow-window," said Wemmick, "being by theriver-side, down the Pool there between Limehouse and Greenwich,and being kept, it seems, by a very respectable widow who has afurnished upper floor to let, Mr. Herbert put it to me, what did Ithink of that as a temporary tenement for Tom, Jack, or Richard?Now, I thought very well of it, for three reasons I'll give you.That is to say:  Firstly.  It's altogether out of all your beats, andis well away from the usual heap of streets great and small.Secondly.  Without going near it yourself, you could always hear ofthe safety of Tom, Jack, or Richard, through Mr. Herbert.  Thirdly.After a while and when it might be prudent, if you should want toslip Tom, Jack, or Richard on board a foreign packet-boat, therehe is--ready."

Much comforted by these considerations, I thanked Wemmick again andagain, and begged him to proceed.

"Well, sir!  Mr. Herbert threw himself into the business with a will,and by nine o'clock last night he housed Tom, Jack, or Richard,--whichever it may be,--you and I don't want to know,--quitesuccessfully.  At the old lodgings it was understood that he wassummoned to Dover, and, in fact, he was taken down the Dover road andcornered out of it.  Now, another great advantage of all this is,that it was done without you, and when, if any one was concerninghimself about your movements, you must be known to be ever so manymiles off and quite otherwise engaged.  This diverts suspicion andconfuses it; and for the same reason I recommended that, even if youcame back last night, you should not go home.  It brings in moreconfusion, and you want confusion."

Wemmick, having finished his breakfast, here looked at his watch,and began to get his coat on.

"And now, Mr. Pip," said he, with his hands still in the sleeves, "Ihave probably done the most I can do; but if I can ever do more,--from a Walworth point of view, and in a strictly private andpersonal capacity,--I shall be glad to do it.  Here's the address.There can be no harm in your going here to-night, and seeing foryourself that all is well with Tom, Jack, or Richard, before you gohome,--which is another reason for your not going home last night.But, after you have gone home, don't go back here.  You are verywelcome, I am sure, Mr. Pip"; his hands were now out of his sleeves,and I was shaking them; "and let me finally impress one importantpoint upon you."  He laid his hands upon my shoulders, and added ina solemn whisper:  "Avail yourself of this evening to lay hold ofhis portable property.  You don't know what may happen to him.  Don'tlet anything happen to the portable property."

Quite despairing of making my mind clear to Wemmick on this point,I forbore to try.

"Time's up," said Wemmick, "and I must be off.  If you had nothingmore pressing to do than to keep here till dark, that's what Ishould advise.  You look very much worried, and it would do you goodto have a perfectly quiet day with the Aged,--he'll be up presently,--and a little bit of--you remember the pig?"

"Of course," said I.

"Well; and a little bit of him.  That sausage you toasted was his,and he was in all respects a first-rater.  Do try him, if it is onlyfor old acquaintance sake.  Good by, Aged Parent!" in a cheeryshout.

"All right, John; all right, my boy!" piped the old man fromwithin.

I soon fell asleep before Wemmick's fire, and the Aged and Ienjoyed one another's society by falling asleep before it more orless all day.  We had loin of pork for dinner, and greens grown onthe estate; and I nodded at the Aged with a good intention wheneverI failed to do it drowsily.  When it was quite dark, I left the Agedpreparing the fire for toast; and I inferred from the number ofteacups, as well as from his glances at the two little doors in thewall, that Miss Skiffins was expected.

Chapter XLVI

Eight o'clock had struck before I got into the air, that wasscented, not disagreeably, by the chips and shavings of thelong-shore boat-builders, and mast, oar, and block makers.  All thatwater-side region of the upper and lower Pool below Bridge wasunknown ground to me; and when I struck down by the river, I foundthat the spot I wanted was not where I had supposed it to be, andwas anything but easy to find.  It was called Mill Pond Bank,Chinks's Basin; and I had no other guide to Chinks's Basin than theOld Green Copper Rope-walk.

It matters not what stranded ships repairing in dry docks I lostmyself among, what old hulls of ships in course of being knocked topieces, what ooze and slime and other dregs of tide, what yards ofship-builders and ship-breakers, what rusty anchors blindly bitinginto the ground, though for years off duty, what mountainous countryof accumulated casks and timber, how many ropewalks that were notthe Old Green Copper.  After several times falling short of mydestination and as often overshooting it, I came unexpectedlyround a corner, upon Mill Pond Bank.  It was a fresh kind of place,all circumstances considered, where the wind from the river hadroom to turn itself round; and there were two or three trees in it,and there was the stump of a ruined windmill, and there was the OldGreen Copper Ropewalk,--whose long and narrow vista I could tracein the moonlight, along a series of wooden frames set in theground, that looked like superannuated haymaking-rakes which hadgrown old and lost most of their teeth.

Selecting from the few queer houses upon Mill Pond Bank a housewith a wooden front and three stories of bow-window (notbay-window, which is another thing), I looked at the plate upon thedoor, and read there, Mrs. Whimple.  That being the name I wanted, Iknocked, and an elderly woman of a pleasant and thriving appearanceresponded.  She was immediately deposed, however, by Herbert, whosilently led me into the parlor and shut the door.  It was an oddsensation to see his very familiar face established quite at homein that very unfamiliar room and region; and I found myself lookingat him, much as I looked at the corner-cupboard with the glass andchina, the shells upon the chimney-piece, and the coloredengravings on the wall, representing the death of Captain Cook, aship-launch, and his Majesty King George the Third in astate coachman's wig, leather-breeches, and top-boots, on theterrace at Windsor.

"All is well, Handel," said Herbert, "and he is quite satisfied,though eager to see you.  My dear girl is with her father; and ifyou'll wait till she comes down, I'll make you known to her, andthen we'll go up stairs.  That's her father."

I had become aware of an alarming growling overhead, and hadprobably expressed the fact in my countenance.

"I am afraid he is a sad old rascal," said Herbert, smiling, "but Ihave never seen him.  Don't you smell rum?  He is always at it."

"At rum?" said I.

"Yes," returned Herbert, "and you may suppose how mild it makes hisgout.  He persists, too, in keeping all the provisions up stairs inhis room, and serving them out.  He keeps them on shelves over hishead, and will weigh them all.  His room must be like a chandler'sshop."

While he thus spoke, the growling noise became a prolonged roar,and then died away.

"What else can be the consequence," said Herbert, in explanation,"if he will cut the cheese?  A man with the gout in his right hand--and everywhere else--can't expect to get through a DoubleGloucester without hurting himself."

He seemed to have hurt himself very much, for he gave anotherfurious roar.

"To have Provis for an upper lodger is quite a godsend to Mrs.Whimple," said Herbert, "for of course people in general won'tstand that noise.  A curious place, Handel; isn't it?"

It was a curious place, indeed; but remarkably well kept and clean.

"Mrs. Whimple," said Herbert, when I told him so, "is the best ofhousewives, and I really do not know what my Clara would do withouther motherly help.  For, Clara has no mother of her own, Handel, andno relation in the world but old Gruffandgrim."

"Surely that's not his name, Herbert?"

"No, no," said Herbert, "that's my name for him.  His name is Mr.Barley.  But what a blessing it is for the son of my father andmother to love a girl who has no relations, and who can neverbother herself or anybody else about her family!"

Herbert had told me on former occasions, and now reminded me, thathe first knew Miss Clara Barley when she was completing hereducation at an establishment at Hammersmith, and that on her beingrecalled home to nurse her father, he and she had confided theiraffection to the motherly Mrs. Whimple, by whom it had been fosteredand regulated with equal kindness and discretion, ever since.  Itwas understood that nothing of a tender nature could possibly beconfided to old Barley, by reason of his being totally unequal tothe consideration of any subject more psychological than Gout, Rum,and Purser's stores.

As we were thus conversing in a low tone while Old Barley'ssustained growl vibrated in the beam that crossed the ceiling, theroom door opened, and a very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twentyor so came in with a basket in her hand:  whom Herbert tenderlyrelieved of the basket, and presented, blushing, as "Clara."  Shereally was a most charming girl, and might have passed for acaptive fairy, whom that truculent Ogre, Old Barley, had pressedinto his service.

"Look here," said Herbert, showing me the basket, with acompassionate and tender smile, after we had talked a little;"here's poor Clara's supper, served out every night.  Here's herallowance of bread, and here's her slice of cheese, and here's herrum,--which I drink.  This is Mr. Barley's breakfast for to-morrow,served out to be cooked.  Two mutton-chops, three potatoes, somesplit peas, a little flour, two ounces of butter, a pinch of salt,and all this black pepper.  It's stewed up together, and taken hot,and it's a nice thing for the gout, I should think!"

There was something so natural and winning in Clara's resigned wayof looking at these stores in detail, as Herbert pointed them out;and something so confiding, loving, and innocent in her modestmanner of yielding herself to Herbert's embracing arm; andsomething so gentle in her, so much needing protection on Mill PondBank, by Chinks's Basin, and the Old Green Copper Ropewalk, withOld Barley growling in the beam,--that I would not have undone theengagement between her and Herbert for all the money in thepocket-book I had never opened.

I was looking at her with pleasure and admiration, when suddenlythe growl swelled into a roar again, and a frightful bumping noisewas heard above, as if a giant with a wooden leg were trying tobore it through the ceiling to come at us.  Upon this Clara said toHerbert, "Papa wants me, darling!" and ran away.

"There is an unconscionable old shark for you!" said Herbert.  "Whatdo you suppose he wants now, Handel?"

"I don't know," said I.  "Something to drink?"

"That's it!" cried Herbert, as if I had made a guess ofextraordinary merit.  "He keeps his grog ready mixed in a little tubon the table.  Wait a moment, and you'll hear Clara lift him up totake some.  There he goes!"  Another roar, with a prolonged shakeat the end.  "Now," said Herbert, as it was succeeded by silence,"he's drinking.  Now," said Herbert, as the growl resounded in thebeam once more, "he's down again on his back!"

Clara returned soon afterwards, and Herbert accompanied meup stairs to see our charge.  As we passed Mr. Barley's door, he washeard hoarsely muttering within, in a strain that rose and felllike wind, the following Refrain, in which I substitute good wishesfor something quite the reverse:--

"Ahoy!  Bless your eyes, here's old Bill Barley.  Here's old BillBarley, bless your eyes.  Here's old Bill Barley on the flat of hisback, by the Lord.  Lying on the flat of his back like a driftingold dead flounder, here's your old Bill Barley, bless your eyes.Ahoy!  Bless you."

In this strain of consolation, Herbert informed me the invisibleBarley would commune with himself by the day and night together;Often, while it was light, having, at the same time, one eye at atelescope which was fitted on his bed for the convenience ofsweeping the river.

In his two cabin rooms at the top of the house, which were freshand airy, and in which Mr. Barley was less audible than below, Ifound Provis comfortably settled.  He expressed no alarm, and seemedto feel none that was worth mentioning; but it struck me that hewas softened,--indefinably, for I could not have said how, and couldnever afterwards recall how when I tried, but certainly.

The opportunity that the day's rest had given me for reflectionhad resulted in my fully determining to say nothing to himrespecting Compeyson.  For anything I knew, his animosity towardsthe man might otherwise lead to his seeking him out and rushing onhis own destruction.  Therefore, when Herbert and I sat down withhim by his fire, I asked him first of all whether he relied onWemmick's judgment and sources of information?

"Ay, ay, dear boy!" he answered, with a grave nod, "Jaggers knows."

"Then, I have talked with Wemmick," said I, "and have come to tellyou what caution he gave me and what advice."

This I did accurately, with the reservation just mentioned; and Itold him how Wemmick had heard, in Newgate prison (whether fromofficers or prisoners I could not say), that he was under somesuspicion, and that my chambers had been watched; how Wemmick hadrecommended his keeping close for a time, and my keeping away fromhim; and what Wemmick had said about getting him abroad.  I added,that of course, when the time came, I should go with him, or shouldfollow close upon him, as might be safest in Wemmick's judgment.What was to follow that I did not touch upon; neither, indeed, was Iat all clear or comfortable about it in my own mind, now that I sawhim in that softer condition, and in declared peril for my sake.  Asto altering my way of living by enlarging my expenses, I put it tohim whether in our present unsettled and difficult circumstances,it would not be simply ridiculous, if it were no worse?

He could not deny this, and indeed was very reasonable throughout.His coming back was a venture, he said, and he had always known itto be a venture.  He would do nothing to make it a desperateventure, and he had very little fear of his safety with such goodhelp.

Herbert, who had been looking at the fire and pondering, here saidthat something had come into his thoughts arising out of Wemmick'ssuggestion, which it might be worth while to pursue.  "We are bothgood watermen, Handel, and could take him down the river ourselveswhen the right time comes.  No boat would then be hired for thepurpose, and no boatmen; that would save at least a chance ofsuspicion, and any chance is worth saving.  Never mind the season;don't you think it might be a good thing if you began at once tokeep a boat at the Temple stairs, and were in the habit of rowingup and down the river?  You fall into that habit, and then whonotices or minds?  Do it twenty or fifty times, and there is nothingspecial in your doing it the twenty-first or fifty-first."

I liked this scheme, and Provis was quite elated by it.  We agreedthat it should be carried into execution, and that Provis shouldnever recognize us if we came below Bridge, and rowed past Mill PondBank.  But we further agreed that he should pull down the blind inthat part of his window which gave upon the east, whenever he sawus and all was right.

Our conference being now ended, and everything arranged, I rose togo; remarking to Herbert that he and I had better not go hometogether, and that I would take half an hour's start of him.  "Idon't like to leave you here," I said to Provis, "though I cannotdoubt your being safer here than near me.  Good by!"

"Dear boy," he answered, clasping my hands, "I don't know when wemay meet again, and I don't like good by.  Say good night!"

"Good night!  Herbert will go regularly between us, and when thetime comes you may be certain I shall be ready.  Good night, goodnight!"

We thought it best that he should stay in his own rooms; and weleft him on the landing outside his door, holding a light over thestair-rail to light us down stairs.  Looking back at him, I thoughtof the first night of his return, when our positions were reversed,and when I little supposed my heart could ever be as heavy andanxious at parting from him as it was now.

Old Barley was growling and swearing when we repassed his door,with no appearance of having ceased or of meaning to cease.  When wegot to the foot of the stairs, I asked Herbert whether he hadpreserved the name of Provis.  He replied, certainly not, and thatthe lodger was Mr. Campbell.  He also explained that the utmost knownof Mr. Campbell there was, that he (Herbert) had Mr. Campbellconsigned to him, and felt a strong personal interest in his beingwell cared for, and living a secluded life.  So, when we went intothe parlor where Mrs. Whimple and Clara were seated at work, I saidnothing of my own interest in Mr. Campbell, but kept it to myself.

When I had taken leave of the pretty, gentle, dark-eyed girl, and ofthe motherly woman who had not outlived her honest sympathy with alittle affair of true love, I felt as if the Old Green CopperRopewalk had grown quite a different place.  Old Barley might be asold as the hills, and might swear like a whole field of troopers,but there were redeeming youth and trust and hope enough inChinks's Basin to fill it to overflowing.  And then I thought ofEstella, and of our parting, and went home very sadly.

All things were as quiet in the Temple as ever I had seen them.  Thewindows of the rooms on that side, lately occupied by Provis, weredark and still, and there was no lounger in Garden Court.  I walkedpast the fountain twice or thrice before I descended the steps thatwere between me and my rooms, but I was quite alone.  Herbert, comingto my bedside when he came in,--for I went straight to bed,dispirited and fatigued,--made the same report.  Opening one of thewindows after that, he looked out into the moonlight, and told methat the pavement was a solemnly empty as the pavement of anycathedral at that same hour.

Next day I set myself to get the boat.  It was soon done, and theboat was brought round to the Temple stairs, and lay where I couldreach her within a minute or two.  Then, I began to go out as fortraining and practice:  sometimes alone, sometimes with Herbert.  Iwas often out in cold, rain, and sleet, but nobody took much noteof me after I had been out a few times.  At first, I kept aboveBlackfriars Bridge; but as the hours of the tide changed, I tooktowards London Bridge.  It was Old London Bridge in those days, andat certain states of the tide there was a race and fall of waterthere which gave it a bad reputation.  But I knew well enough how to"shoot' the bridge after seeing it done, and so began to row aboutamong the shipping in the Pool, and down to Erith.  The first time Ipassed Mill Pond Bank, Herbert and I were pulling a pair of oars;and, both in going and returning, we saw the blind towards the eastcome down.  Herbert was rarely there less frequently than threetimes in a week, and he never brought me a single word ofintelligence that was at all alarming.  Still, I knew that there wascause for alarm, and I could not get rid of the notion of beingwatched.  Once received, it is a haunting idea; how many undesigningpersons I suspected of watching me, it would be hard to calculate.

In short, I was always full of fears for the rash man who was inhiding.  Herbert had sometimes said to me that he found it pleasantto stand at one of our windows after dark, when the tide wasrunning down, and to think that it was flowing, with everything itbore, towards Clara.  But I thought with dread that it was flowingtowards Magwitch, and that any black mark on its surface might behis pursuers, going swiftly, silently, and surely, to take him.

Chapter XLVII

Some weeks passed without bringing any change.  We waited forWemmick, and he made no sign.  If I had never known him out ofLittle Britain, and had never enjoyed the privilege of being on afamiliar footing at the Castle, I might have doubted him; not sofor a moment, knowing him as I did.

My worldly affairs began to wear a gloomy appearance, and I waspressed for money by more than one creditor.  Even I myself began toknow the want of money (I mean of ready money in my own pocket),and to relieve it by converting some easily spared articles ofjewelery into cash.  But I had quite determined that it would be aheartless fraud to take more money from my patron in the existingstate of my uncertain thoughts and plans.  Therefore, I had sent himthe unopened pocket-book by Herbert, to hold in his own keeping,and I felt a kind of satisfaction--whether it was a false kind ora true, I hardly know--in not having profited by his generositysince his revelation of himself.

As the time wore on, an impression settled heavily upon me thatEstella was married.  Fearful of having it confirmed, though it wasall but a conviction, I avoided the newspapers, and begged Herbert(to whom I had confided the circumstances of our last interview)never to speak of her to me.  Why I hoarded up this last wretchedlittle rag of the robe of hope that was rent and given to thewinds, how do I know?  Why did you who read this, commit that notdissimilar inconsistency of your own last year, last month, lastweek?

It was an unhappy life that I lived; and its one dominant anxiety,towering over all its other anxieties, like a high mountain above arange of mountains, never disappeared from my view.  Still, no newcause for fear arose.  Let me start from my bed as I would, with theterror fresh upon me that he was discovered; let me sit listening,as I would with dread, for Herbert's returning step at night, lestit should be fleeter than ordinary, and winged with evil news,--forall that, and much more to like purpose, the round of things wenton.  Condemned to inaction and a state of constant restlessness andsuspense, I rowed about in my boat, and waited, waited, waited, asI best could.

There were states of the tide when, having been down the river, Icould not get back through the eddy-chafed arches and starlings ofold London Bridge; then, I left my boat at a wharf near the CustomHouse, to be brought up afterwards to the Temple stairs.  I was notaverse to doing this, as it served to make me and my boat acommoner incident among the water-side people there.  From thisslight occasion sprang two meetings that I have now to tell of.

One afternoon, late in the month of February, I came ashore at thewharf at dusk.  I had pulled down as far as Greenwich with the ebbtide, and had turned with the tide.  It had been a fine bright day,but had become foggy as the sun dropped, and I had had to feel myway back among the shipping, pretty carefully.  Both in going andreturning, I had seen the signal in his window, All well.

As it was a raw evening, and I was cold, I thought I would comfortmyself with dinner at once; and as I had hours of dejection andsolitude before me if I went home to the Temple, I thought I wouldafterwards go to the play.  The theatre where Mr. Wopsle had achievedhis questionable triumph was in that water-side neighborhood (itis nowhere now), and to that theatre I resolved to go.  I was awarethat Mr. Wopsle had not succeeded in reviving the Drama, but, on thecontrary, had rather partaken of its decline.  He had been ominouslyheard of, through the play-bills, as a faithful Black, in connectionwith a little girl of noble birth, and a monkey.  And Herbert hadseen him as a predatory Tartar of comic propensities, with a facelike a red brick, and an outrageous hat all over bells.

I dined at what Herbert and I used to call a geographicalchop-house, where there were maps of the world in porter-pot rimson every half-yard of the tablecloths, and charts of gravy onevery one of the knives,--to this day there is scarcely a singlechop-house within the Lord Mayor's dominions which is notgeographical,--and wore out the time in dozing over crumbs, staringat gas, and baking in a hot blast of dinners.  By and by, I rousedmyself, and went to the play.

There, I found a virtuous boatswain in His Majesty's service,--amost excellent man, though I could have wished his trousers notquite so tight in some places, and not quite so loose in others,--who knocked all the little men's hats over their eyes, though hewas very generous and brave, and who wouldn't hear of anybody'spaying taxes, though he was very patriotic.  He had a bag of moneyin his pocket, like a pudding in the cloth, and on that propertymarried a young person in bed-furniture, with great rejoicings; thewhole population of Portsmouth (nine in number at the last census)turning out on the beach to rub their own hands and shakeeverybody else's, and sing "Fill, fill!"  A certaindark-complexioned Swab, however, who wouldn't fill, or do anythingelse that was proposed to him, and whose heart was openly stated(by the boatswain) to be as black as his figure-head, proposed totwo other Swabs to get all mankind into difficulties; which was soeffectually done (the Swab family having considerable politicalinfluence) that it took half the evening to set things right, andthen it was only brought about through an honest little grocer witha white hat, black gaiters, and red nose, getting into a clock,with a gridiron, and listening, and coming out, and knockingeverybody down from behind with the gridiron whom he couldn'tconfute with what he had overheard.  This led to Mr. Wopsle's (whohad never been heard of before) coming in with a star and garteron, as a plenipotentiary of great power direct from the Admiralty,to say that the Swabs were all to go to prison on the spot, andthat he had brought the boatswain down the Union Jack, as a slightacknowledgment of his public services.  The boatswain, unmanned forthe first time, respectfully dried his eyes on the Jack, and thencheering up, and addressing Mr. Wopsle as Your Honor, solicitedpermission to take him by the fin.  Mr. Wopsle, conceding his fin witha gracious dignity, was immediately shoved into a dusty corner,while everybody danced a hornpipe; and from that corner, surveyingthe public with a discontented eye, became aware of me.

The second piece was the last new grand comic Christmas pantomime,in the first scene of which, it pained me to suspect that Idetected Mr. Wopsle with red worsted legs under a highly magnifiedphosphoric countenance and a shock of red curtain-fringe for hishair, engaged in the manufacture of thunderbolts in a mine, anddisplaying great cowardice when his gigantic master came home (veryhoarse) to dinner.  But he presently presented himself underworthier circumstances; for, the Genius of Youthful Love being inwant of assistance,--on account of the parental brutality of anignorant farmer who opposed the choice of his daughter's heart, bypurposely falling upon the object, in a flour-sack, out of thefirst-floor window,--summoned a sententious Enchanter; and he,coming up from the antipodes rather unsteadily, after an apparentlyviolent journey, proved to be Mr. Wopsle in a high-crowned hat, witha necromantic work in one volume under his arm.  The business ofthis enchanter on earth being principally to be talked at, sungat, butted at, danced at, and flashed at with fires of variouscolors, he had a good deal of time on his hands.  And I observed,with great surprise, that he devoted it to staring in my directionas if he were lost in amazement.

There was something so remarkable in the increasing glare of Mr.Wopsle's eye, and he seemed to be turning so many things over inhis mind and to grow so confused, that I could not make it out.  Isat thinking of it long after he had ascended to the clouds in alarge watch-case, and still I could not make it out.  I was stillthinking of it when I came out of the theatre an hour afterwards,and found him waiting for me near the door.

"How do you do?" said I, shaking hands with him as we turned downthe street together.  "I saw that you saw me."

"Saw you, Mr. Pip!" he returned.  "Yes, of course I saw you.  But whoelse was there?"

"Who else?"

"It is the strangest thing," said Mr. Wopsle, drifting into his lostlook again; "and yet I could swear to him."

Becoming alarmed, I entreated Mr. Wopsle to explain his meaning.

"Whether I should have noticed him at first but for your beingthere," said Mr. Wopsle, going on in the same lost way, "I can't bepositive; yet I think I should."

Involuntarily I looked round me, as I was accustomed to look roundme when I went home; for these mysterious words gave me a chill.

"Oh!  He can't be in sight," said Mr. Wopsle.  "He went out before Iwent off.  I saw him go."

Having the reason that I had for being suspicious, I evensuspected this poor actor.  I mistrusted a design to entrap me intosome admission.  Therefore I glanced at him as we walked ontogether, but said nothing.

"I had a ridiculous fancy that he must be with you, Mr. Pip, till Isaw that you were quite unconscious of him, sitting behind youthere like a ghost."

My former chill crept over me again, but I was resolved not tospeak yet, for it was quite consistent with his words that he mightbe set on to induce me to connect these references with Provis.  Ofcourse, I was perfectly sure and safe that Provis had not beenthere.

"I dare say you wonder at me, Mr. Pip; indeed, I see you do.  But itis so very strange!  You'll hardly believe what I am going to tellyou.  I could hardly believe it myself, if you told me."

"Indeed?" said I.

"No, indeed.  Mr. Pip, you remember in old times a certain ChristmasDay, when you were quite a child, and I dined at Gargery's, andsome soldiers came to the door to get a pair of handcuffs mended?"

"I remember it very well."

"And you remember that there was a chase after two convicts, andthat we joined in it, and that Gargery took you on his back, andthat I took the lead, and you kept up with me as well as you could?"

"I remember it all very well."  Better than he thought,--except thelast clause.

"And you remember that we came up with the two in a ditch, and thatthere was a scuffle between them, and that one of them had beenseverely handled and much mauled about the face by the other?"

"I see it all before me."

"And that the soldiers lighted torches, and put the two in thecentre, and that we went on to see the last of them, over the blackmarshes, with the torchlight shining on their faces,--I amparticular about that,--with the torchlight shining on their faces,when there was an outer ring of dark night all about us?"

"Yes," said I.  "I remember all that."

"Then, Mr. Pip, one of those two prisoners sat behind you tonight.  Isaw him over your shoulder."

"Steady!" I thought.  I asked him then, "Which of the two do yousuppose you saw?"

"The one who had been mauled," he answered readily, "and I'll swearI saw him!  The more I think of him, the more certain I am of him."

"This is very curious!" said I, with the best assumption I couldput on of its being nothing more to me.  "Very curious indeed!"

I cannot exaggerate the enhanced disquiet into which thisconversation threw me, or the special and peculiar terror I felt atCompeyson's having been behind me "like a ghost."  For if he hadever been out of my thoughts for a few moments together since thehiding had begun, it was in those very moments when he was closestto me; and to think that I should be so unconscious and off myguard after all my care was as if I had shut an avenue of ahundred doors to keep him out, and then had found him at my elbow.I could not doubt, either, that he was there, because I was there,and that, however slight an appearance of danger there might beabout us, danger was always near and active.

I put such questions to Mr. Wopsle as, When did the man come in?  Hecould not tell me that; he saw me, and over my shoulder he saw theman.  It was not until he had seen him for some time that he beganto identify him; but he had from the first vaguely associated himwith me, and known him as somehow belonging to me in the oldvillage time.  How was he dressed?  Prosperously, but not noticeablyotherwise; he thought, in black.  Was his face at all disfigured?No, he believed not.  I believed not too, for, although in mybrooding state I had taken no especial notice of the people behindme, I thought it likely that a face at all disfigured would haveattracted my attention.

When Mr. Wopsle had imparted to me all that he could recall or Iextract, and when I had treated him to a little appropriaterefreshment, after the fatigues of the evening, we parted.  It wasbetween twelve and one o'clock when I reached the Temple, and thegates were shut.  No one was near me when I went in and went home.

Herbert had come in, and we held a very serious council by thefire.  But there was nothing to be done, saving to communicate toWemmick what I had that night found out, and to remind him that wewaited for his hint.  As I thought that I might compromise him if Iwent too often to the Castle, I made this communication by letter.I wrote it before I went to bed, and went out and posted it; andagain no one was near me.  Herbert and I agreed that we could donothing else but be very cautious.  And we were very cautious indeed,--more cautious than before, if that were possible,--and I for mypart never went near Chinks's Basin, except when I rowed by, andthen I only looked at Mill Pond Bank as I looked at anything else.

Chapter XLVIII

The second of the two meetings referred to in the last chapter                                                                                                                                 occurred about a week after the first.  I had again left my boat atthe wharf below Bridge; the time was an hour earlier in theafternoon; and, undecided where to dine, I had strolled up intoCheapside, and was strolling along it, surely the most unsettledperson in all the busy concourse, when a large hand was laid uponmy shoulder by some one overtaking me.  It was Mr. Jaggers's hand,and he passed it through my arm.

"As we are going in the same direction, Pip, we may walk together.Where are you bound for?"

"For the Temple, I think," said I.

"Don't you know?" said Mr. Jaggers.

"Well," I returned, glad for once to get the better of him incross-examination, "I do not know, for I have not made up my mind."

"You are going to dine?" said Mr. Jaggers.  "You don't mind admittingthat, I suppose?"

"No," I returned, "I don't mind admitting that."

"And are not engaged?"

"I don't mind admitting also that I am not engaged."

"Then," said Mr. Jaggers, "come and dine with me."

I was going to excuse myself, when he added, "Wemmick's coming."So I changed my excuse into an acceptance,--the few words I haduttered, serving for the beginning of either,--and we went alongCheapside and slanted off to Little Britain, while the lights werespringing up brilliantly in the shop windows, and the streetlamp-lighters, scarcely finding ground enough to plant theirladders on in the midst of the afternoon's bustle, were skipping upand down and running in and out, opening more red eyes in thegathering fog than my rushlight tower at the Hummums had openedwhite eyes in the ghostly wall.

At the office in Little Britain there was the usual letter-writing,hand-washing, candle-snuffing, and safe-locking, that closed thebusiness of the day.  As I stood idle by Mr. Jaggers's fire, itsrising and falling flame made the two casts on the shelf look as ifthey were playing a diabolical game at bo-peep with me; while thepair of coarse, fat office candles that dimly lighted Mr. Jaggers ashe wrote in a corner were decorated with dirty winding-sheets, asif in remembrance of a host of hanged clients.

We went to Gerrard Street, all three together, in a hackney-coach:And, as soon as we got there, dinner was served.  Although I shouldnot have thought of making, in that place, the most distantreference by so much as a look to Wemmick's Walworth sentiments,yet I should have had no objection to catching his eye now and thenin a friendly way.  But it was not to be done.  He turned his eyes onMr. Jaggers whenever he raised them from the table, and was as dryand distant to me as if there were twin Wemmicks, and this was thewrong one.

"Did you send that note of Miss Havisham's to Mr. Pip, Wemmick?" Mr.Jaggers asked, soon after we began dinner.

"No, sir," returned Wemmick; "it was going by post, when youbrought Mr. Pip into the office.  Here it is."  He handed it to hisprincipal instead of to me.

"It's a note of two lines, Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, handing it on,"sent up to me by Miss Havisham on account of her not being sureof your address.  She tells me that she wants to see you on a littlematter of business you mentioned to her.  You'll go down?"

"Yes," said I, casting my eyes over the note, which was exactly inthose terms.

"When do you think of going down?"

"I have an impending engagement," said I, glancing at Wemmick, whowas putting fish into the post-office, "that renders me ratheruncertain of my time.  At once, I think."

"If Mr. Pip has the intention of going at once," said Wemmick to Mr.Jaggers, "he needn't write an answer, you know."

Receiving this as an intimation that it was best not to delay, Isettled that I would go to-morrow, and said so.  Wemmick drank aglass of wine, and looked with a grimly satisfied air at Mr. Jaggers,but not at me.

"So, Pip!  Our friend the Spider," said Mr. Jaggers, "has played hiscards.  He has won the pool."

It was as much as I could do to assent.

"Hah!  He is a promising fellow--in his way--but he may not haveit all his own way.  The stronger will win in the end, but thestronger has to be found out first.  If he should turn to, and beather--"

"Surely," I interrupted, with a burning face and heart, "you do notseriously think that he is scoundrel enough for that, Mr. Jaggers?"

"I didn't say so, Pip.  I am putting a case.  If he should turn toand beat her, he may possibly get the strength on his side; if itshould be a question of intellect, he certainly will not.  It wouldbe chance work to give an opinion how a fellow of that sort willturn out in such circumstances, because it's a toss-up between tworesults."

"May I ask what they are?"

"A fellow like our friend the Spider," answered Mr. Jaggers, "eitherbeats or cringes.  He may cringe and growl, or cringe and notgrowl; but he either beats or cringes.  Ask Wemmick his opinion."

"Either beats or cringes," said Wemmick, not at all addressinghimself to me.

"So here's to Mrs. Bentley Drummle," said Mr. Jaggers, taking adecanter of choicer wine from his dumb-waiter, and filling for eachof us and for himself, "and may the question of supremacy besettled to the lady's satisfaction!  To the satisfaction of the ladyand the gentleman, it never will be.  Now, Molly, Molly, Molly,Molly, how slow you are to-day!"

She was at his elbow when he addressed her, putting a dish upon thetable.  As she withdrew her hands from it, she fell back a step ortwo, nervously muttering some excuse.  And a certain action of herfingers, as she spoke, arrested my attention.

"What's the matter?" said Mr. Jaggers.

"Nothing.  Only the subject we were speaking of," said I, "wasrather painful to me."

The action of her fingers was like the action of knitting.  Shestood looking at her master, not understanding whether she was freeto go, or whether he had more to say to her and would call her backif she did go.  Her look was very intent.  Surely, I had seen exactlysuch eyes and such hands on a memorable occasion very lately!

He dismissed her, and she glided out of the room.  But she remainedbefore me as plainly as if she were still there.  I looked at thosehands, I looked at those eyes, I looked at that flowing hair; and Icompared them with other hands, other eyes, other hair, that I knewof, and with what those might be after twenty years of a brutalhusband and a stormy life.  I looked again at those hands and eyesof the housekeeper, and thought of the inexplicable feeling thathad come over me when I last walked--not alone--in the ruinedgarden, and through the deserted brewery.  I thought how the samefeeling had come back when I saw a face looking at me, and a handwaving to me from a stage-coach window; and how it had come backagain and had flashed about me like lightning, when I had passed ina carriage--not alone--through a sudden glare of light in a darkstreet.  I thought how one link of association had helped thatidentification in the theatre, and how such a link, wanting before,had been riveted for me now, when I had passed by a chance swiftfrom Estella's name to the fingers with their knitting action, andthe attentive eyes.  And I felt absolutely certain that this womanwas Estella's mother.

Mr. Jaggers had seen me with Estella, and was not likely to havemissed the sentiments I had been at no pains to conceal.  He noddedwhen I said the subject was painful to me, clapped me on the back,put round the wine again, and went on with his dinner.

Only twice more did the housekeeper reappear, and then her stay inthe room was very short, and Mr. Jaggers was sharp with her.  But herhands were Estella's hands, and her eyes were Estella's eyes, andif she had reappeared a hundred times I could have been neithermore sure nor less sure that my conviction was the truth.

It was a dull evening, for Wemmick drew his wine, when it cameround, quite as a matter of business,--just as he might have drawnhis salary when that came round,--and with his eyes on his chief,sat in a state of perpetual readiness for cross-examination.  As tothe quantity of wine, his post-office was as indifferent and readyas any other post-office for its quantity of letters.  From my pointof view, he was the wrong twin all the time, and only externallylike the Wemmick of Walworth.

We took our leave early, and left together.  Even when we weregroping among Mr. Jaggers's stock of boots for our hats, I felt thatthe right twin was on his way back; and we had not gone half adozen yards down Gerrard Street in the Walworth direction, before Ifound that I was walking arm in arm with the right twin, and thatthe wrong twin had evaporated into the evening air.

"Well!" said Wemmick, "that's over!  He's a wonderful man, withouthis living likeness; but I feel that I have to screw myself up whenI dine with him,--and I dine more comfortably unscrewed."

I felt that this was a good statement of the case, and told him so.

"Wouldn't say it to anybody but yourself," he answered.  "I knowthat what is said between you and me goes no further."

I asked him if he had ever seen Miss Havisham's adopted daughter,Mrs. Bentley Drummle.  He said no.  To avoid being too abrupt, I thenspoke of the Aged and of Miss Skiffins.  He looked rather sly whenI mentioned Miss Skiffins, and stopped in the street to blow hisnose, with a roll of the head, and a flourish not quite free fromlatent boastfulness.

"Wemmick," said I, "do you remember telling me, before I first wentto Mr. Jaggers's private house, to notice that housekeeper?"

"Did I?" he replied.  "Ah, I dare say I did.  Deuce take me," headded, suddenly, "I know I did.  I find I am not quite unscrewedyet."

"A wild beast tamed, you called her."

"And what do you call her?"

"The same.  How did Mr. Jaggers tame her, Wemmick?"

"That's his secret.  She has been with him many a long year."

"I wish you would tell me her story.  I feel a particular interestin being acquainted with it.  You know that what is said between youand me goes no further."

"Well!" Wemmick replied, "I don't know her story,--that is, I don'tknow all of it.  But what I do know I'll tell you.  We are in ourprivate and personal capacities, of course."

"Of course."

"A score or so of years ago, that woman was tried at the Old Baileyfor murder, and was acquitted.  She was a very handsome young woman,and I believe had some gypsy blood in her.  Anyhow, it was hot enoughwhen it was up, as you may suppose."

"But she was acquitted."

"Mr. Jaggers was for her," pursued Wemmick, with a look full ofmeaning, "and worked the case in a way quite astonishing.  It was adesperate case, and it was comparatively early days with him then,and he worked it to general admiration; in fact, it may almost besaid to have made him.  He worked it himself at the police-office,day after day for many days, contending against even a committal;and at the trial where he couldn't work it himself, sat undercounsel, and--every one knew--put in all the salt and pepper.  Themurdered person was a woman,--a woman a good ten years older, verymuch larger, and very much stronger.  It was a case of jealousy.They both led tramping lives, and this woman in Gerrard Street herehad been married very young, over the broomstick (as we say), to atramping man, and was a perfect fury in point of jealousy.  Themurdered woman,--more a match for the man, certainly, in point ofyears--was found dead in a barn near Hounslow Heath.  There hadbeen a violent struggle, perhaps a fight.  She was bruised andscratched and torn, and had been held by the throat, at last, andchoked.  Now, there was no reasonable evidence to implicate anyperson but this woman, and on the improbabilities of her havingbeen able to do it Mr. Jaggers principally rested his case.  You maybe sure," said Wemmick, touching me on the sleeve, "that he neverdwelt upon the strength of her hands then, though he sometimes doesnow."

I had told Wemmick of his showing us her wrists, that day of thedinner party.

"Well, sir!" Wemmick went on; "it happened--happened, don't yousee?--that this woman was so very artfully dressed from the timeof her apprehension, that she looked much slighter than she reallywas; in particular, her sleeves are always remembered to have beenso skilfully contrived that her arms had quite a delicate look.  Shehad only a bruise or two about her,--nothing for a tramp,--but thebacks of her hands were lacerated, and the question was, Was itwith finger-nails?  Now, Mr. Jaggers showed that she had struggledthrough a great lot of brambles which were not as high as her face;but which she could not have got through and kept her hands out of;and bits of those brambles were actually found in her skin and putin evidence, as well as the fact that the brambles in question werefound on examination to have been broken through, and to havelittle shreds of her dress and little spots of blood upon them hereand there.  But the boldest point he made was this:  it wasattempted to be set up, in proof of her jealousy, that she was understrong suspicion of having, at about the time of the murder,frantically destroyed her child by this man--some three years old--to revenge herself upon him.  Mr. Jaggers worked that in this way:"We say these are not marks of finger-nails, but marks of brambles,and we show you the brambles.  You say they are marks offinger-nails, and you set up the hypothesis that she destroyed herchild.  You must accept all consequences of that hypothesis.  Foranything we know, she may have destroyed her child, and the childin clinging to her may have scratched her hands.  What then?  You arenot trying her for the murder of her child; why don't you?  As tothis case, if you will have scratches, we say that, for anything weknow, you may have accounted for them, assuming for the sake ofargument that you have not invented them?"  To sum up, sir," saidWemmick, "Mr. Jaggers was altogether too many for the jury, and theygave in."

"Has she been in his service ever since?"

"Yes; but not only that," said Wemmick, "she went into his serviceimmediately after her acquittal, tamed as she is now.  She has sincebeen taught one thing and another in the way of her duties, but shewas tamed from the beginning."

"Do you remember the sex of the child?"

"Said to have been a girl."

"You have nothing more to say to me to-night?"

"Nothing.  I got your letter and destroyed it.  Nothing."

We exchanged a cordial good-night, and I went home, with new matterfor my thoughts, though with no relief from the old.

Chapter XLIX

Putting Miss Havisham's note in my pocket, that it might serve asmy credentials for so soon reappearing at Satis House, in case herwaywardness should lead her to express any surprise at seeing me, Iwent down again by the coach next day.  But I alighted at theHalfway House, and breakfasted there, and walked the rest of thedistance; for I sought to get into the town quietly by theunfrequented ways, and to leave it in the same manner.

The best light of the day was gone when I passed along the quietechoing courts behind the High Street.  The nooks of ruin where theold monks had once had their refectories and gardens, and where thestrong walls were now pressed into the service of humble sheds andstables, were almost as silent as the old monks in their graves.The cathedral chimes had at once a sadder and a more remote soundto me, as I hurried on avoiding observation, than they had ever hadbefore; so, the swell of the old organ was borne to my ears likefuneral music; and the rooks, as they hovered about the gray towerand swung in the bare high trees of the priory garden, seemed tocall to me that the place was changed, and that Estella was goneout of it for ever.

An elderly woman, whom I had seen before as one of the servants wholived in the supplementary house across the back courtyard, openedthe gate.  The lighted candle stood in the dark passage within, asof old, and I took it up and ascended the staircase alone.  MissHavisham was not in her own room, but was in the larger room acrossthe landing.  Looking in at the door, after knocking in vain, I sawher sitting on the hearth in a ragged chair, close before, and lostin the contemplation of, the ashy fire.

Doing as I had often done, I went in, and stood touching the oldchimney-piece, where she could see me when she raised her eyes.There was an air or utter loneliness upon her, that would havemoved me to pity though she had wilfully done me a deeper injurythan I could charge her with.  As I stood compassionating her, andthinking how, in the progress of time, I too had come to be a part ofthe wrecked fortunes of that house, her eyes rested on me.  Shestared, and said in a low voice, "Is it real?"

"It is I, Pip.  Mr. Jaggers gave me your note yesterday, and I havelost no time."

"Thank you.  Thank you."

As I brought another of the ragged chairs to the hearth and satdown, I remarked a new expression on her face, as if she wereafraid of me.

"I want," she said, "to pursue that subject you mentioned to mewhen you were last here, and to show you that I am not all stone.But perhaps you can never believe, now, that there is anythinghuman in my heart?"

When I said some reassuring words, she stretched out her tremulousright hand, as though she was going to touch me; but she recalledit again before I understood the action, or knew how to receive it.

"You said, speaking for your friend, that you could tell me how todo something useful and good.  Something that you would like done,is it not?"

"Something that I would like done very much."

"What is it?"

I began explaining to her that secret history of the partnership.  Ihad not got far into it, when I judged from her looks that she wasthinking in a discursive way of me, rather than of what I said.  Itseemed to be so; for, when I stopped speaking, many moments passedbefore she showed that she was conscious of the fact.

"Do you break off," she asked then, with her former air of beingafraid of me, "because you hate me too much to bear to speak tome?"

"No, no," I answered, "how can you think so, Miss Havisham!  Istopped because I thought you were not following what I said."

"Perhaps I was not," she answered, putting a hand to her head."Begin again, and let me look at something else.  Stay!  Now tellme."

She set her hand upon her stick in the resolute way that sometimeswas habitual to her, and looked at the fire with a strongexpression of forcing herself to attend.  I went on with myexplanation, and told her how I had hoped to complete thetransaction out of my means, but how in this I was disappointed.That part of the subject (I reminded her) involved matters whichcould form no part of my explanation, for they were the weightysecrets of another.

"So!" said she, assenting with her head, but not looking at me."And how much money is wanting to complete the purchase?"

I was rather afraid of stating it, for it sounded a large sum."Nine hundred pounds."

"If I give you the money for this purpose, will you keep my secretas you have kept your own?"

"Quite as faithfully."

"And your mind will be more at rest?"

"Much more at rest."

"Are you very unhappy now?"

She asked this question, still without looking at me, but in anunwonted tone of sympathy.  I could not reply at the moment, for myvoice failed me.  She put her left arm across the head of her stick,and softly laid her forehead on it.

"I am far from happy, Miss Havisham; but I have other causes ofdisquiet than any you know of.  They are the secrets I havementioned."

After a little while, she raised her head, and looked at the fireAgain.

"It is noble in you to tell me that you have other causes ofunhappiness, Is it true?"

"Too true."

"Can I only serve you, Pip, by serving your friend?  Regarding thatas done, is there nothing I can do for you yourself?"

"Nothing.  I thank you for the question.  I thank you even more forthe tone of the question.  But there is nothing."

She presently rose from her seat, and looked about the blightedroom for the means of writing.  There were none there, and she tookfrom her pocket a yellow set of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnishedgold, and wrote upon them with a pencil in a case of tarnished goldthat hung from her neck.

"You are still on friendly terms with Mr. Jaggers?"

"Quite.  I dined with him yesterday."

"This is an authority to him to pay you that money, to lay out atyour irresponsible discretion for your friend.  I keep no moneyhere; but if you would rather Mr. Jaggers knew nothing of thematter, I will send it to you."

"Thank you, Miss Havisham; I have not the least objection toreceiving it from him."

She read me what she had written; and it was direct and clear, andevidently intended to absolve me from any suspicion of profiting bythe receipt of the money.  I took the tablets from her hand, and ittrembled again, and it trembled more as she took off the chain towhich the pencil was attached, and put it in mine.  All this shedid without looking at me.

"My name is on the first leaf.  If you can ever write under my name,"I forgive her," though ever so long after my broken heart is dustpray do it!"

"O Miss Havisham," said I, "I can do it now.  There have been soremistakes; and my life has been a blind and thankless one; and Iwant forgiveness and direction far too much, to be bitter withyou."

She turned her face to me for the first time since she had avertedit, and, to my amazement, I may even add to my terror, dropped onher knees at my feet; with her folded hands raised to me in themanner in which, when her poor heart was young and fresh and whole,they must often have been raised to heaven from her mother's side.

To see her with her white hair and her worn face kneeling at myfeet gave me a shock through all my frame.  I entreated her torise, and got my arms about her to help her up; but she onlypressed that hand of mine which was nearest to her grasp, and hungher head over it and wept.  I had never seen her shed a tear before,and, in the hope that the relief might do her good, I bent over herwithout speaking.  She was not kneeling now, but was down upon theground.

"O!" she cried, despairingly.  "What have I done!  What have I done!"

"If you mean, Miss Havisham, what have you done to injure me, letme answer.  Very little.  I should have loved her under anycircumstances.  Is she married?"

"Yes."

It was a needless question, for a new desolation in the desolatehouse had told me so.

"What have I done!  What have I done!"  She wrung her hands, andcrushed her white hair, and returned to this cry over and overagain.  "What have I done!"

I knew not how to answer, or how to comfort her.  That she had donea grievous thing in taking an impressionable child to mould intothe form that her wild resentment, spurned affection, and woundedpride found vengeance in, I knew full well.  But that, in shuttingout the light of day, she had shut out infinitely more; that, inseclusion, she had secluded herself from a thousand natural andhealing influences; that, her mind, brooding solitary, had growndiseased, as all minds do and must and will that reverse theappointed order of their Maker, I knew equally well.  And could Ilook upon her without compassion, seeing her punishment in the ruinshe was, in her profound unfitness for this earth on which she wasplaced, in the vanity of sorrow which had become a master mania,like the vanity of penitence, the vanity of remorse, the vanity ofunworthiness, and other monstrous vanities that have been curses inthis world?

"Until you spoke to her the other day, and until I saw in you alooking-glass that showed me what I once felt myself, I did notknow what I had done.  What have I done!  What have I done!"  And soagain, twenty, fifty times over, What had she done!

"Miss Havisham," I said, when her cry had died away, "you maydismiss me from your mind and conscience.  But Estella is adifferent case, and if you can ever undo any scrap of what you havedone amiss in keeping a part of her right nature away from her, itwill be better to do that than to bemoan the past through ahundred years."

"Yes, yes, I know it.  But, Pip--my dear!"  There was an earnestwomanly compassion for me in her new affection.  "My dear!  Believethis:  when she first came to me, I meant to save her from miserylike my own.  At first, I meant no more."

"Well, well!" said I.  "I hope so."

"But as she grew, and promised to be very beautiful, I graduallydid worse, and with my praises, and with my jewels, and with myteachings, and with this figure of myself always before her, awarning to back and point my lessons, I stole her heart away, andput ice in its place."

"Better," I could not help saying, "to have left her a naturalheart, even to be bruised or broken."

With that, Miss Havisham looked distractedly at me for a while, andthen burst out again, What had she done!

"If you knew all my story," she pleaded, "you would have somecompassion for me and a better understanding of me."

"Miss Havisham," I answered, as delicately as I could, "I believe Imay say that I do know your story, and have known it ever since Ifirst left this neighborhood.  It has inspired me with greatcommiseration, and I hope I understand it and its influences.  Doeswhat has passed between us give me any excuse for asking you aquestion relative to Estella?  Not as she is, but as she was whenshe first came here?"

She was seated on the ground, with her arms on the ragged chair,and her head leaning on them.  She looked full at me when I saidthis, and replied, "Go on."

"Whose child was Estella?"

She shook her head.

"You don't know?"

She shook her head again.

"But Mr. Jaggers brought her here, or sent her here?"

"Brought her here."

"Will you tell me how that came about?"

She answered in a low whisper and with caution:  "I had been shut upin these rooms a long time (I don't know how long; you know whattime the clocks keep here), when I told him that I wanted a littlegirl to rear and love, and save from my fate.  I had first seen himwhen I sent for him to lay this place waste for me; having read ofhim in the newspapers, before I and the world parted.  He told methat he would look about him for such an orphan child.  One night hebrought her here asleep, and I called her Estella."

"Might I ask her age then?"

"Two or three.  She herself knows nothing, but that she was left anorphan and I adopted her."

So convinced I was of that woman's being her mother, that I wantedno evidence to establish the fact in my own mind.  But, to any mind,I thought, the connection here was clear and straight.

What more could I hope to do by prolonging the interview?  I hadsucceeded on behalf of Herbert, Miss Havisham had told me all sheknew of Estella, I had said and done what I could to ease her mind.No matter with what other words we parted; we parted.

Twilight was closing in when I went down stairs into the naturalair.  I called to the woman who had opened the gate when I entered,that I would not trouble her just yet, but would walk round theplace before leaving.  For I had a presentiment that I should neverbe there again, and I felt that the dying light was suited to mylast view of it.

By the wilderness of casks that I had walked on long ago, and onwhich the rain of years had fallen since, rotting them in manyplaces, and leaving miniature swamps and pools of water upon thosethat stood on end, I made my way to the ruined garden.  I went allround it; round by the corner where Herbert and I had fought ourbattle; round by the paths where Estella and I had walked.  So cold,so lonely, so dreary all!

Taking the brewery on my way back, I raised the rusty latch of alittle door at the garden end of it, and walked through.  I wasgoing out at the opposite door,--not easy to open now, for the dampwood had started and swelled, and the hinges were yielding, and thethreshold was encumbered with a growth of fungus,--when I turned myhead to look back.  A childish association revived with wonderfulforce in the moment of the slight action, and I fancied that I sawMiss Havisham hanging to the beam.  So strong was the impression,that I stood under the beam shuddering from head to foot before Iknew it was a fancy,--though to be sure I was there in an instant.

The mournfulness of the place and time, and the great terror ofthis illusion, though it was but momentary, caused me to feel anindescribable awe as I came out between the open wooden gates whereI had once wrung my hair after Estella had wrung my heart.  Passingon into the front courtyard, I hesitated whether to call the womanto let me out at the locked gate of which she had the key, or firstto go up stairs and assure myself that Miss Havisham was as safeand well as I had left her.  I took the latter course and went up.

I looked into the room where I had left her, and I saw her seatedin the ragged chair upon the hearth close to the fire, with herback towards me.  In the moment when I was withdrawing my head to goquietly away, I saw a great flaming light spring up.  In the samemoment I saw her running at me, shrieking, with a whirl of fireblazing all about her, and soaring at least as many feet above herhead as she was high.

I had a double-caped great-coat on, and over my arm another thickcoat.  That I got them off, closed with her, threw her down, and gotthem over her; that I dragged the great cloth from the table forthe same purpose, and with it dragged down the heap of rottennessin the midst, and all the ugly things that sheltered there; that wewere on the ground struggling like desperate enemies, and that thecloser I covered her, the more wildly she shrieked and tried tofree herself,--that this occurred I knew through the result, but notthrough anything I felt, or thought, or knew I did.  I knew nothinguntil I knew that we were on the floor by the great table, and thatpatches of tinder yet alight were floating in the smoky air, which,a moment ago, had been her faded bridal dress.

Then, I looked round and saw the disturbed beetles and spidersrunning away over the floor, and the servants coming in withbreathless cries at the door.  I still held her forcibly down withall my strength, like a prisoner who might escape; and I doubt if Ieven knew who she was, or why we had struggled, or that she hadbeen in flames, or that the flames were out, until I saw thepatches of tinder that had been her garments no longer alight butfalling in a black shower around us.

She was insensible, and I was afraid to have her moved, or eventouched.  Assistance was sent for, and I held her until it came, asif I unreasonably fancied (I think I did) that, if I let her go, thefire would break out again and consume her.  When I got up, on thesurgeon's coming to her with other aid, I was astonished to seethat both my hands were burnt; for, I had no knowledge of itthrough the sense of feeling.

On examination it was pronounced that she had received serioushurts, but that they of themselves were far from hopeless; thedanger lay mainly in the nervous shock.  By the surgeon'sdirections, her bed was carried into that room and laid upon thegreat table, which happened to be well suited to the dressing ofher injuries.  When I saw her again, an hour afterwards, she lay,indeed, where I had seen her strike her stick, and had heard her saythat she would lie one day.

Though every vestige of her dress was burnt, as they told me, shestill had something of her old ghastly bridal appearance; for, theyhad covered her to the throat with white cotton-wool, and as shelay with a white sheet loosely overlying that, the phantom air ofsomething that had been and was changed was still upon her.

I found, on questioning the servants, that Estella was in Paris,and I got a promise from the surgeon that he would write to her bythe next post.  Miss Havisham's family I took upon myself; intendingto communicate with Mr. Matthew Pocket only, and leave him to do ashe liked about informing the rest.  This I did next day, throughHerbert, as soon as I returned to town.

There was a stage, that evening, when she spoke collectedly of whathad happened, though with a certain terrible vivacity.  Towardsmidnight she began to wander in her speech; and after that itgradually set in that she said innumerable times in a low solemnvoice, "What have I done!"  And then, "When she first came, I meantto save her from misery like mine."  And then, "Take the pencil andwrite under my name, 'I forgive her!'"  She never changed the orderof these three sentences, but she sometimes left out a word in oneor other of them; never putting in another word, but always leavinga blank and going on to the next word.

As I could do no service there, and as I had, nearer home, thatpressing reason for anxiety and fear which even her wanderingscould not drive out of my mind, I decided, in the course of thenight that I would return by the early morning coach, walking on amile or so, and being taken up clear of the town.  At about sixo'clock of the morning, therefore, I leaned over her and touchedher lips with mine, just as they said, not stopping for beingtouched, "Take the pencil and write under my name, 'I forgiveher.'"

Chapter L

My hands had been dressed twice or thrice in the night, and againin the morning.  My left arm was a good deal burned to the elbow,and, less severely, as high as the shoulder; it was very painful,but the flames had set in that direction, and I felt thankful itwas no worse.  My right hand was not so badly burnt but that I couldmove the fingers.  It was bandaged, of course, but much lessinconveniently than my left hand and arm; those I carried in asling; and I could only wear my coat like a cloak, loose over myshoulders and fastened at the neck.  My hair had been caught by thefire, but not my head or face.

When Herbert had been down to Hammersmith and seen his father, hecame back to me at our chambers, and devoted the day to attending onme.  He was the kindest of nurses, and at stated times took off thebandages, and steeped them in the cooling liquid that was keptready, and put them on again, with a patient tenderness that I wasdeeply grateful for.

At first, as I lay quiet on the sofa, I found it painfullydifficult, I might say impossible, to get rid of the impression ofthe glare of the flames, their hurry and noise, and the fierceburning smell.  If I dozed for a minute, I was awakened by MissHavisham's cries, and by her running at me with all that height offire above her head.  This pain of the mind was much harder tostrive against than any bodily pain I suffered; and Herbert, seeingthat, did his utmost to hold my attention engaged.

Neither of us spoke of the boat, but we both thought of it.  Thatwas made apparent by our avoidance of the subject, and by ouragreeing--without agreement--to make my recovery of the use of myhands a question of so many hours, not of so many weeks.

My first question when I saw Herbert had been of course, whetherall was well down the river?  As he replied in the affirmative, withperfect confidence and cheerfulness, we did not resume the subjectuntil the day was wearing away.  But then, as Herbert changed thebandages, more by the light of the fire than by the outer light, hewent back to it spontaneously.

"I sat with Provis last night, Handel, two good hours."

"Where was Clara?"

"Dear little thing!" said Herbert.  "She was up and down withGruffandgrim all the evening.  He was perpetually pegging at thefloor the moment she left his sight.  I doubt if he can hold outlong, though.  What with rum and pepper,--and pepper and rum,--Ishould think his pegging must be nearly over."

"And then you will be married, Herbert?"

"How can I take care of the dear child otherwise?--Lay your armout upon the back of the sofa, my dear boy, and I'll sit down here,and get the bandage off so gradually that you shall not know whenit comes.  I was speaking of Provis.  Do you know, Handel, heimproves?"

"I said to you I thought he was softened when I last saw him."

"So you did.  And so he is.  He was very communicative last night,and told me more of his life.  You remember his breaking off hereabout some woman that he had had great trouble with.--Did I hurtyou?"

I had started, but not under his touch.  His words had given me astart.

"I had forgotten that, Herbert, but I remember it now you speak ofit."

"Well!  He went into that part of his life, and a dark wild part itis.  Shall I tell you?  Or would it worry you just now?"

"Tell me by all means.  Every word."

Herbert bent forward to look at me more nearly, as if my reply hadbeen rather more hurried or more eager than he could quite accountfor.  "Your head is cool?" he said, touching it.

"Quite," said I.  "Tell me what Provis said, my dear Herbert."

"It seems," said Herbert, "--there's a bandage off mostcharmingly, and now comes the cool one,--makes you shrink at first,my poor dear fellow, don't it?  but it will be comfortable presently,--it seems that the woman was a young woman, and a jealous woman,and a revengeful woman; revengeful, Handel, to the last degree."

"To what last degree?"

"Murder.--Does it strike too cold on that sensitive place?"

"I don't feel it.  How did she murder?  Whom did she murder?" "Why,the deed may not have merited quite so terrible a name," saidHerbert, "but, she was tried for it, and Mr. Jaggers defended her,and the reputation of that defence first made his name known toProvis.  It was another and a stronger woman who was the victim, andthere had been a struggle--in a barn.  Who began it, or how fair itwas, or how unfair, may be doubtful; but how it ended is certainlynot doubtful, for the victim was found throttled."

"Was the woman brought in guilty?"

"No; she was acquitted.--My poor Handel, I hurt you!"

"It is impossible to be gentler, Herbert.  Yes?  What else?"

"This acquitted young woman and Provis had a little child; a littlechild of whom Provis was exceedingly fond.  On the evening of thevery night when the object of her jealousy was strangled as I tellyou, the young woman presented herself before Provis for onemoment, and swore that she would destroy the child (which was inher possession), and he should never see it again; then shevanished.--There's the worst arm comfortably in the sling oncemore, and now there remains but the right hand, which is a fareasier job.  I can do it better by this light than by a stronger,for my hand is steadiest when I don't see the poor blisteredpatches too distinctly.--You don't think your breathing isaffected, my dear boy?  You seem to breathe quickly."

"Perhaps I do, Herbert.  Did the woman keep her oath?"

"There comes the darkest part of Provis's life.  She did."

"That is, he says she did."

"Why, of course, my dear boy," returned Herbert, in a tone ofsurprise, and again bending forward to get a nearer look at me.  "Hesays it all.  I have no other information."

"No, to be sure."

"Now, whether," pursued Herbert, "he had used the child's motherill, or whether he had used the child's mother well, Provis doesn'tsay; but she had shared some four or five years of the wretchedlife he described to us at this fireside, and he seems to have feltpity for her, and forbearance towards her.  Therefore, fearing heshould be called upon to depose about this destroyed child, and sobe the cause of her death, he hid himself (much as he grieved forthe child), kept himself dark, as he says, out of the way and outof the trial, and was only vaguely talked of as a certain mancalled Abel, out of whom the jealousy arose.  After the acquittalshe disappeared, and thus he lost the child and the child'smother."

"I want to ask--"

"A moment, my dear boy, and I have done.  That evil genius,Compeyson, the worst of scoundrels among many scoundrels, knowingof his keeping out of the way at that time and of his reasons fordoing so, of course afterwards held the knowledge over his head asa means of keeping him poorer and working him harder.  It was clearlast night that this barbed the point of Provis's animosity."

"I want to know," said I, "and particularly, Herbert, whether hetold you when this happened?"

"Particularly?  Let me remember, then, what he said as to that.  Hisexpression was, 'a round score o' year ago, and a'most directlyafter I took up wi' Compeyson.'  How old were you when you came uponhim in the little churchyard?"

"I think in my seventh year."

"Ay.  It had happened some three or four years then, he said, andyou brought into his mind the little girl so tragically lost, whowould have been about your age."

"Herbert," said I, after a short silence, in a hurried way, "canyou see me best by the light of the window, or the light of thefire?"

"By the firelight," answered Herbert, coming close again.

"Look at me."

"I do look at you, my dear boy."

"Touch me."

"I do touch you, my dear boy."

"You are not afraid that I am in any fever, or that my head is muchdisordered by the accident of last night?"

"N-no, my dear boy," said Herbert, after taking time to examine me."You are rather excited, but you are quite yourself."

"I know I am quite myself.  And the man we have in hiding down theriver, is Estella's Father."

Chapter LI

What purpose I had in view when I was hot on tracing out andproving Estella's parentage, I cannot say.  It will presently beseen that the question was not before me in a distinct shape untilit was put before me by a wiser head than my own.

But when Herbert and I had held our momentous conversation, I wasseized with a feverish conviction that I ought to hunt the matterdown,--that I ought not to let it rest, but that I ought to see Mr.Jaggers, and come at the bare truth.  I really do not know whether Ifelt that I did this for Estella's sake, or whether I was glad totransfer to the man in whose preservation I was so much concernedsome rays of the romantic interest that had so long surrounded me.Perhaps the latter possibility may be the nearer to the truth.

Any way, I could scarcely be withheld from going out toGerrard Street that night.  Herbert's representations that, if I did,I should probably be laid up and stricken useless, when ourfugitive's safety would depend upon me, alone restrained myimpatience.  On the understanding, again and again reiterated, that,come what would, I was to go to Mr. Jaggers to-morrow, I at lengthsubmitted to keep quiet, and to have my hurts looked after, and tostay at home.  Early next morning we went out together, and at thecorner of Giltspur Street by Smithfield, I left Herbert to go hisway into the City, and took my way to Little Britain.

There were periodical occasions when Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick wentover the office accounts, and checked off the vouchers, and put allthings straight.  On these occasions, Wemmick took his books andpapers into Mr. Jaggers's room, and one of the up-stairs clerks camedown into the outer office.  Finding such clerk on Wemmick's postthat morning, I knew what was going on; but I was not sorry tohave Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick together, as Wemmick would then hearfor himself that I said nothing to compromise him.

My appearance, with my arm bandaged and my coat loose over myshoulders, favored my object.  Although I had sent Mr. Jaggers abrief account of the accident as soon as I had arrived in town, yetI had to give him all the details now; and the speciality of theoccasion caused our talk to be less dry and hard, and less strictlyregulated by the rules of evidence, than it had been before.  WhileI described the disaster, Mr. Jaggers stood, according to his wont,before the fire.  Wemmick leaned back in his chair, staring at me,with his hands in the pockets of his trousers, and his pen puthorizontally into the post.  The two brutal casts, alwaysinseparable in my mind from the official proceedings, seemed to becongestively considering whether they didn't smell fire at thepresent moment.

My narrative finished, and their questions exhausted, I thenproduced Miss Havisham's authority to receive the nine hundredpounds for Herbert.  Mr. Jaggers's eyes retired a little deeper intohis head when I handed him the tablets, but he presently handedthem over to Wemmick, with instructions to draw the check for hissignature.  While that was in course of being done, I looked on atWemmick as he wrote, and Mr. Jaggers, poising and swaying himself onhis well-polished boots, looked on at me.  "I am sorry, Pip," saidhe, as I put the check in my pocket, when he had signed it, "thatwe do nothing for you."

"Miss Havisham was good enough to ask me," I returned, "whether shecould do nothing for me, and I told her No."

"Everybody should know his own business," said Mr. Jaggers.  And Isaw Wemmick's lips form the words "portable property."

"I should not have told her No, if I had been you," said MrJaggers; "but every man ought to know his own business best."

"Every man's business," said Wemmick, rather reproachfully towardsme, "is portable property."

As I thought the time was now come for pursuing the theme I had atheart, I said, turning on Mr. Jaggers:--

"I did ask something of Miss Havisham, however, sir.  I asked her togive me some information relative to her adopted daughter, and shegave me all she possessed."

"Did she?" said Mr. Jaggers, bending forward to look at his bootsand then straightening himself.  "Hah!  I don't think I should havedone so, if I had been Miss Havisham.  But she ought to know her ownbusiness best."

"I know more of the history of Miss Havisham's adopted child thanMiss Havisham herself does, sir.  I know her mother."

Mr. Jaggers looked at me inquiringly, and repeated "Mother?"

"I have seen her mother within these three days."

"Yes?" said Mr. Jaggers.

"And so have you, sir.  And you have seen her still more recently."

"Yes?" said Mr. Jaggers.

"Perhaps I know more of Estella's history than even you do," saidI.  "I know her father too."

A certain stop that Mr. Jaggers came to in his manner--he was tooself-possessed to change his manner, but he could not help itsbeing brought to an indefinably attentive stop--assured me that hedid not know who her father was.  This I had strongly suspected fromProvis's account (as Herbert had repeated it) of his having kepthimself dark; which I pieced on to the fact that he himself was notMr. Jaggers's client until some four years later, and when he couldhave no reason for claiming his identity.  But, I could not be sureof this unconsciousness on Mr. Jaggers's part before, though I wasquite sure of it now.

"So!  You know the young lady's father, Pip?" said Mr. Jaggers.

"Yes," I replied, "and his name is Provis--from New South Wales."

Even Mr. Jaggers started when I said those words.  It was theslightest start that could escape a man, the most carefullyrepressed and the sooner checked, but he did start, though he madeit a part of the action of taking out his pocket-handkerchief.  HowWemmick received the announcement I am unable to say; for I wasafraid to look at him just then, lest Mr. Jaggers's sharpness shoulddetect that there had been some communication unknown to himbetween us.

"And on what evidence, Pip," asked Mr. Jaggers, very coolly, as hepaused with his handkerchief half way to his nose, "does Provismake this claim?"

"He does not make it," said I, "and has never made it, and has noknowledge or belief that his daughter is in existence."

For once, the powerful pocket-handkerchief failed.  My reply was soUnexpected, that Mr. Jaggers put the handkerchief back into hispocket without completing the usual performance, folded his arms,and looked with stern attention at me, though with an immovableface.

Then I told him all I knew, and how I knew it; with the onereservation that I left him to infer that I knew from Miss Havishamwhat I in fact knew from Wemmick.  I was very careful indeed as tothat.  Nor did I look towards Wemmick until I had finished all Ihad to tell, and had been for some time silently meeting Mr.Jaggers's look.  When I did at last turn my eyes in Wemmick'sdirection, I found that he had unposted his pen, and was intentupon the table before him.

"Hah!" said Mr. Jaggers at last, as he moved towards the papers onthe table.  "What item was it you were at, Wemmick, when Mr. Pipcame in?"

But I could not submit to be thrown off in that way, and I made apassionate, almost an indignant appeal, to him to be more frank andmanly with me.  I reminded him of the false hopes into which I hadlapsed, the length of time they had lasted, and the discovery I hadmade:  and I hinted at the danger that weighed upon my spirits.  Irepresented myself as being surely worthy of some little confidencefrom him, in return for the confidence I had just now imparted.  Isaid that I did not blame him, or suspect him, or mistrust him, butI wanted assurance of the truth from him.  And if he asked me why Iwanted it, and why I thought I had any right to it, I would tellhim, little as he cared for such poor dreams, that I had lovedEstella dearly and long, and that although I had lost her, and mustlive a bereaved life, whatever concerned her was still nearer anddearer to me than anything else in the world.  And seeing that Mr.Jaggers stood quite still and silent, and apparently quiteobdurate, under this appeal, I turned to Wemmick, and said,"Wemmick, I know you to be a man with a gentle heart.  I have seenyour pleasant home, and your old father, and all the innocent,cheerful playful ways with which you refresh your business life.And I entreat you to say a word for me to Mr. Jaggers, and torepresent to him that, all circumstances considered, he ought to bemore open with me!"

I have never seen two men look more oddly at one another than Mr.Jaggers and Wemmick did after this apostrophe.  At first, amisgiving crossed me that Wemmick would be instantly dismissed fromhis employment; but it melted as I saw Mr. Jaggers relax intosomething like a smile, and Wemmick become bolder.

"What's all this?" said Mr. Jaggers.  "You with an old father, andyou with pleasant and playful ways?"

"Well!" returned Wemmick.  "If I don't bring 'em here, what does itmatter?"

"Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, laying his hand upon my arm, and smilingopenly, "this man must be the most cunning impostor in all London."

"Not a bit of it," returned Wemmick, growing bolder and bolder.  "Ithink you're another."

Again they exchanged their former odd looks, each apparently stilldistrustful that the other was taking him in.

"You with a pleasant home?" said Mr. Jaggers.

"Since it don't interfere with business," returned Wemmick, "let itbe so.  Now, I look at you, sir, I shouldn't wonder if you might beplanning and contriving to have a pleasant home of your own one ofthese days, when you're tired of all this work."

Mr. Jaggers nodded his head retrospectively two or three times, andactually drew a sigh.  "Pip," said he, "we won't talk about 'poordreams;' you know more about such things than I, having muchfresher experience of that kind.  But now about this other matter.I'll put a case to you.  Mind!  I admit nothing."

He waited for me to declare that I quite understood that heexpressly said that he admitted nothing.

"Now, Pip," said Mr. Jaggers, "put this case.  Put the case that awoman, under such circumstances as you have mentioned, held herchild concealed, and was obliged to communicate the fact to herlegal adviser, on his representing to her that he must know, withan eye to the latitude of his defence, how the fact stood aboutthat child.  Put the case that, at the same time he held a trust tofind a child for an eccentric rich lady to adopt and bring up."

"I follow you, sir."

"Put the case that he lived in an atmosphere of evil, and that allhe saw of children was their being generated in great numbers forcertain destruction.  Put the case that he often saw childrensolemnly tried at a criminal bar, where they were held up to beseen; put the case that he habitually knew of their beingimprisoned, whipped, transported, neglected, cast out, qualified inall ways for the hangman, and growing up to be hanged.  Put the casethat pretty nigh all the children he saw in his daily businesslife he had reason to look upon as so much spawn, to develop intothe fish that were to come to his net,--to be prosecuted, defended,forsworn, made orphans, bedevilled somehow."

"I follow you, sir."

"Put the case, Pip, that here was one pretty little child out ofthe heap who could be saved; whom the father believed dead, anddared make no stir about; as to whom, over the mother, the legaladviser had this power:  "I know what you did, and how you did it.You came so and so, you did such and such things to divert suspicion.  I have tracked you through it all, andI tell it you all.  Part with the child, unless it should benecessary to produce it to clear you, and then it shall be produced.  Give the child into my hands, and I will do my best to bring you off.  If you are saved, your child is saved too; if you are lost, your child is still saved."  Put the case that this was done, and that the woman was cleared."

"I understand you perfectly."

"But that I make no admissions?"

"That you make no admissions."  And Wemmick repeated, "Noadmissions."

"Put the case, Pip, that passion and the terror of death had alittle shaken the woman's intellects, and that when she was set atliberty, she was scared out of the ways of the world, and went tohim to be sheltered.  Put the case that he took her in, and that hekept down the old, wild, violent nature whenever he saw an inkling ofits breaking out, by asserting his power over her in the old way.Do you comprehend the imaginary case?"

"Quite."

"Put the case that the child grew up, and was married for money.That the mother was still living.  That the father was still living.That the mother and father, unknown to one another, were dwellingwithin so many miles, furlongs, yards if you like, of one another.That the secret was still a secret, except that you had got wind ofit.  Put that last case to yourself very carefully."

"I do."

"I ask Wemmick to put it to himself very carefully."

And Wemmick said, "I do."

"For whose sake would you reveal the secret?  For the father's?  Ithink he would not be much the better for the mother.  For themother's?  I think if she had done such a deed she would be saferwhere she was.  For the daughter's?  I think it would hardly serveher to establish her parentage for the information of her husband,and to drag her back to disgrace, after an escape of twenty years,pretty secure to last for life.  But add the case that you hadloved her, Pip, and had made her the subject of those 'poor dreams'which have, at one time or another, been in the heads of more menthan you think likely, then I tell you that you had better--andwould much sooner when you had thought well of it--chop off thatbandaged left hand of yours with your bandaged right hand, and thenpass the chopper on to Wemmick there, to cut that off too."

I looked at Wemmick, whose face was very grave.  He gravely touchedhis lips with his forefinger.  I did the same.  Mr. Jaggers did thesame.  "Now, Wemmick," said the latter then, resuming his usualmanner, "what item was it you were at when Mr. Pip came in?"

Standing by for a little, while they were at work, I observed thatthe odd looks they had cast at one another were repeated severaltimes:  with this difference now, that each of them seemedsuspicious, not to say conscious, of having shown himself in a weakand unprofessional light to the other.  For this reason, I suppose,they were now inflexible with one another; Mr. Jaggers being highlydictatorial, and Wemmick obstinately justifying himself wheneverthere was the smallest point in abeyance for a moment.  I had neverseen them on such ill terms; for generally they got on very wellindeed together.

But they were both happily relieved by the opportune appearance ofMike, the client with the fur cap and the habit of wiping his noseon his sleeve, whom I had seen on the very first day of myappearance within those walls.  This individual, who, either in hisown person or in that of some member of his family, seemed to bealways in trouble (which in that place meant Newgate), called toannounce that his eldest daughter was taken up on suspicion ofshoplifting.  As he imparted this melancholy circumstance toWemmick, Mr. Jaggers standing magisterially before the fire andtaking no share in the proceedings, Mike's eye happened to twinklewith a tear.

"What are you about?" demanded Wemmick, with the utmostindignation.  "What do you come snivelling here for?"

"I didn't go to do it, Mr. Wemmick."

"You did," said Wemmick.  "How dare you?  You're not in a fit stateto come here, if you can't come here without spluttering like a badpen.  What do you mean by it?"

"A man can't help his feelings, Mr. Wemmick," pleaded Mike.

"His what?" demanded Wemmick, quite savagely.  "Say that again!"

"Now look here my man," said Mr. Jaggers, advancing a step, andpointing to the door.  "Get out of this office.  I'll have nofeelings here.  Get out."

"It serves you right," said Wemmick, "Get out."

So, the unfortunate Mike very humbly withdrew, and Mr. Jaggers andWemmick appeared to have re-established their good understanding,and went to work again with an air of refreshment upon them as ifthey had just had lunch.

Chapter LII

From Little Britain I went, with my check in my pocket, to MissSkiffins's brother, the accountant; and Miss Skiffins's brother,the accountant, going straight to Clarriker's and bringingClarriker to me, I had the great satisfaction of concluding thatarrangement.  It was the only good thing I had done, and the onlycompleted thing I had done, since I was first apprised of my greatexpectations.

Clarriker informing me on that occasion that the affairs of theHouse were steadily progressing, that he would now be able toestablish a small branch-house in the East which was much wantedfor the extension of the business, and that Herbert in his newpartnership capacity would go out and take charge of it, I foundthat I must have prepared for a separation from my friend, eventhough my own affairs had been more settled.  And now, indeed, I feltas if my last anchor were loosening its hold, and I should soon bedriving with the winds and waves.

But there was recompense in the joy with which Herbert would comehome of a night and tell me of these changes, little imagining thathe told me no news, and would sketch airy pictures of himselfconducting Clara Barley to the land of the Arabian Nights, and ofme going out to join them (with a caravan of camels, I believe),and of our all going up the Nile and seeing wonders.  Without beingsanguine as to my own part in those bright plans, I felt thatHerbert's way was clearing fast, and that old Bill Barley had butto stick to his pepper and rum, and his daughter would soon behappily provided for.

We had now got into the month of March.  My left arm, though itpresented no bad symptoms, took, in the natural course, so long toheal that I was still unable to get a coat on.  My right arm wastolerably restored; disfigured, but fairly serviceable.

On a Monday morning, when Herbert and I were at breakfast, Ireceived the following letter from Wemmick by the post.

"Walworth.  Burn this as soon as read.  Early in the week, or sayWednesday, you might do what you know of, if you felt disposed totry it.  Now burn."

When I had shown this to Herbert and had put it in the fire--butnot before we had both got it by heart--we considered what to do.For, of course my being disabled could now be no longer kept out ofview.

"I have thought it over again and again," said Herbert, "and Ithink I know a better course than taking a Thames waterman.  TakeStartop.  A good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, andenthusiastic and honorable."

I had thought of him more than once.

"But how much would you tell him, Herbert?"

"It is necessary to tell him very little.  Let him suppose it a merefreak, but a secret one, until the morning comes:  then let him knowthat there is urgent reason for your getting Provis aboard andaway.  You go with him?"

"No doubt."

"Where?"

It had seemed to me, in the many anxious considerations I had giventhe point, almost indifferent what port we made for,--Hamburg,Rotterdam, Antwerp,--the place signified little, so that he was out of England.  Any foreign steamer that fell in our way and wouldtake us up would do.  I had always proposed to myself to get himwell down the river in the boat; certainly well beyond Gravesend,which was a critical place for search or inquiry if suspicion wereafoot.  As foreign steamers would leave London at about the time ofhigh-water, our plan would be to get down the river by a previousebb-tide, and lie by in some quiet spot until we could pull off toone.  The time when one would be due where we lay, wherever thatmight be, could be calculated pretty nearly, if we made inquiriesbeforehand.

Herbert assented to all this, and we went out immediately afterbreakfast to pursue our investigations.  We found that a steamer forHamburg was likely to suit our purpose best, and we directed ourthoughts chiefly to that vessel.  But we noted down what otherforeign steamers would leave London with the same tide, and wesatisfied ourselves that we knew the build and color of each.  Wethen separated for a few hours:  I, to get at once such passports aswere necessary; Herbert, to see Startop at his lodgings.  We bothdid what we had to do without any hindrance, and when we met againat one o'clock reported it done.  I, for my part, was prepared withpassports; Herbert had seen Startop, and he was more than ready tojoin.

Those two should pull a pair of oars, we settled, and I wouldsteer; our charge would be sitter, and keep quiet; as speed was notour object, we should make way enough.  We arranged that Herbertshould not come home to dinner before going to Mill Pond Bank thatevening; that he should not go there at all to-morrow evening,Tuesday; that he should prepare Provis to come down to some stairshard by the house, on Wednesday, when he saw us approach, and notsooner; that all the arrangements with him should be concluded thatMonday night; and that he should be communicated with no more inany way, until we took him on board.

These precautions well understood by both of us, I went home.

On opening the outer door of our chambers with my key, I found aletter in the box, directed to me; a very dirty letter, though notill-written.  It had been delivered by hand (of course, since I lefthome), and its contents were these:--

"If you are not afraid to come to the old marshes to-night ortomorrow night at nine, and to come to the little sluice-house bythe limekiln, you had better come.  If you want informationregarding your uncle Provis, you had much better come and tell noone, and lose no time.  You must come alone.  Bring this with you."

I had had load enough upon my mind before the receipt of thisstrange letter.  What to do now, I could not tell.  And the worstwas, that I must decide quickly, or I should miss the afternooncoach, which would take me down in time for to-night.  To-morrownight I could not think of going, for it would be too close uponthe time of the flight.  And again, for anything I knew, theproffered information might have some important bearing on theflight itself.

If I had had ample time for consideration, I believe I should stillhave gone.  Having hardly any time for consideration,--my watchshowing me that the coach started within half an hour,--I resolvedto go.  I should certainly not have gone, but for the reference tomy Uncle Provis.  That, coming on Wemmick's letter and the morning'sbusy preparation, turned the scale.

It is so difficult to become clearly possessed of the contents ofalmost any letter, in a violent hurry, that I had to read thismysterious epistle again twice, before its injunction to me to besecret got mechanically into my mind.  Yielding to it in the samemechanical kind of way, I left a note in pencil for Herbert,telling him that as I should be so soon going away, I knew not forhow long, I had decided to hurry down and back, to ascertain formyself how Miss Havisham was faring.  I had then barely time to getmy great-coat, lock up the chambers, and make for the coach-officeby the short by-ways.  If I had taken a hackney-chariot and gone bythe streets, I should have missed my aim; going as I did, I caughtthe coach just as it came out of the yard.  I was the only insidepassenger, jolting away knee-deep in straw, when I came to myself.

For I really had not been myself since the receipt of the letter;it had so bewildered me, ensuing on the hurry of the morning.  Themorning hurry and flutter had been great; for, long and anxiouslyas I had waited for Wemmick, his hint had come like a surprise atlast.  And now I began to wonder at myself for being in the coach,and to doubt whether I had sufficient reason for being there, andto consider whether I should get out presently and go back, and toargue against ever heeding an anonymous communication, and, inshort, to pass through all those phases of contradiction andindecision to which I suppose very few hurried people arestrangers.  Still, the reference to Provis by name masteredeverything.  I reasoned as I had reasoned already without knowing it,--if that be reasoning,--in case any harm should befall him throughmy not going, how could I ever forgive myself!

It was dark before we got down, and the journey seemed long anddreary to me, who could see little of it inside, and who could notgo outside in my disabled state.  Avoiding the Blue Boar, I put upat an inn of minor reputation down the town, and ordered somedinner.  While it was preparing, I went to Satis House and inquiredfor Miss Havisham; she was still very ill, though consideredsomething better.

My inn had once been a part of an ancient ecclesiastical house, andI dined in a little octagonal common-room, like a font.  As I wasnot able to cut my dinner, the old landlord with a shining baldhead did it for me.  This bringing us into conversation, he was sogood as to entertain me with my own story,--of course with thepopular feature that Pumblechook was my earliest benefactor and thefounder of my fortunes.

"Do you know the young man?" said I.

"Know him!" repeated the landlord.  "Ever since he was--no heightat all."

"Does he ever come back to this neighborhood?"

"Ay, he comes back," said the landlord, "to his great friends, nowand again, and gives the cold shoulder to the man that made him."

"What man is that?"

"Him that I speak of," said the landlord.  "Mr. Pumblechook."

"Is he ungrateful to no one else?"

"No doubt he would be, if he could," returned the landlord, "but hecan't.  And why?  Because Pumblechook done everything for him."

"Does Pumblechook say so?"

"Say so!" replied the landlord.  "He han't no call to say so."

"But does he say so?"

"It would turn a man's blood to white wine winegar to hear him tellof it, sir," said the landlord.

I thought, "Yet Joe, dear Joe, you never tell of it.  Long-sufferingand loving Joe, you never complain.  Nor you, sweet-tempered Biddy!"

"Your appetite's been touched like by your accident," said thelandlord, glancing at the bandaged arm under my coat.  "Try atenderer bit."

"No, thank you," I replied, turning from the table to brood over thefire.  "I can eat no more.  Please take it away."

I had never been struck at so keenly, for my thanklessness to Joe,as through the brazen impostor Pumblechook.  The falser he, thetruer Joe; the meaner he, the nobler Joe.

My heart was deeply and most deservedly humbled as I mused over thefire for an hour or more.  The striking of the clock aroused me, butnot from my dejection or remorse, and I got up and had my coatfastened round my neck, and went out.  I had previously sought in mypockets for the letter, that I might refer to it again; but I couldnot find it, and was uneasy to think that it must have been droppedin the straw of the coach.  I knew very well, however, that theappointed place was the little sluice-house by the limekiln on themarshes, and the hour nine.  Towards the marshes I now wentstraight, having no time to spare.

Chapter LIII

It was a dark night, though the full moon rose as I left theenclosed lands, and passed out upon the marshes.  Beyond their darkline there was a ribbon of clear sky, hardly broad enough to holdthe red large moon.  In a few minutes she had ascended out of thatclear field, in among the piled mountains of cloud.

There was a melancholy wind, and the marshes were very dismal.  Astranger would have found them insupportable, and even to me theywere so oppressive that I hesitated, half inclined to go back.  ButI knew them well, and could have found my way on a far darkernight, and had no excuse for returning, being there.  So, havingcome there against my inclination, I went on against it.

The direction that I took was not that in which my old home lay,nor that in which we had pursued the convicts.  My back was turnedtowards the distant Hulks as I walked on, and, though I could seethe old lights away on the spits of sand, I saw them over myshoulder.  I knew the limekiln as well as I knew the old Battery,but they were miles apart; so that, if a light had been burning ateach point that night, there would have been a long strip of theblank horizon between the two bright specks.

At first, I had to shut some gates after me, and now and then tostand still while the cattle that were lying in the banked-uppathway arose and blundered down among the grass and reeds.  Butafter a little while I seemed to have the whole flats to myself.

It was another half-hour before I drew near to the kiln.  The limewas burning with a sluggish stifling smell, but the fires were madeup and left, and no workmen were visible.  Hard by was a smallstone-quarry.  It lay directly in my way, and had been worked thatday, as I saw by the tools and barrows that were lying about.

Coming up again to the marsh level out of this excavation,--for therude path lay through it,--I saw a light in the old sluice-house.  Iquickened my pace, and knocked at the door with my hand.  Waitingfor some reply, I looked about me, noticing how the sluice wasabandoned and broken, and how the house--of wood with a tiled roof--would not be proof against the weather much longer, if it were soeven now, and how the mud and ooze were coated with lime, and howthe choking vapor of the kiln crept in a ghostly way towards me.Still there was no answer, and I knocked again.  No answer still,and I tried the latch.

It rose under my hand, and the door yielded.  Looking in, I saw alighted candle on a table, a bench, and a mattress on a trucklebedstead.  As there was a loft above, I called, "Is there any onehere?" but no voice answered.  Then I looked at my watch, and,finding that it was past nine, called again, "Is there any onehere?"  There being still no answer, I went out at the door,irresolute what to do.

It was beginning to rain fast.  Seeing nothing save what I had seenalready, I turned back into the house, and stood just within theshelter of the doorway, looking out into the night.  While I wasconsidering that some one must have been there lately and must soonbe coming back, or the candle would not be burning, it came into myhead to look if the wick were long.  I turned round to do so, andhad taken up the candle in my hand, when it was extinguished bysome violent shock; and the next thing I comprehended was, that Ihad been caught in a strong running noose, thrown over my head frombehind.

"Now," said a suppressed voice with an oath, "I've got you!"

"What is this?" I cried, struggling.  "Who is it?  Help, help, help!"

Not only were my arms pulled close to my sides, but the pressure onmy bad arm caused me exquisite pain.  Sometimes, a strong man'shand, sometimes a strong man's breast, was set against my mouth todeaden my cries, and with a hot breath always close to me, Istruggled ineffectually in the dark, while I was fastened tight tothe wall.  "And now," said the suppressed voice with another oath,"call out again, and I'll make short work of you!"

Faint and sick with the pain of my injured arm, bewildered by thesurprise, and yet conscious how easily this threat could be put inexecution, I desisted, and tried to ease my arm were it ever solittle.  But, it was bound too tight for that.  I felt as if, havingbeen burnt before, it were now being boiled.

The sudden exclusion of the night, and the substitution of blackdarkness in its place, warned me that the man had closed a shutter.After groping about for a little, he found the flint and steel hewanted, and began to strike a light.  I strained my sight upon thesparks that fell among the tinder, and upon which he breathed andbreathed, match in hand, but I could only see his lips, and theblue point of the match; even those but fitfully.  The tinder wasdamp,--no wonder there,--and one after another the sparks died out.

The man was in no hurry, and struck again with the flint and steel.As the sparks fell thick and bright about him, I could see hishands, and touches of his face, and could make out that he wasseated and bending over the table; but nothing more.  Presently Isaw his blue lips again, breathing on the tinder, and then a flareof light flashed up, and showed me Orlick.

Whom I had looked for, I don't know.  I had not looked for him.Seeing him, I felt that I was in a dangerous strait indeed, and Ikept my eyes upon him.

He lighted the candle from the flaring match with greatdeliberation, and dropped the match, and trod it out.  Then he putthe candle away from him on the table, so that he could see me, andsat with his arms folded on the table and looked at me.  I made outthat I was fastened to a stout perpendicular ladder a few inchesfrom the wall,--a fixture there,--the means of ascent to the loftabove.

"Now," said he, when we had surveyed one another for some time,"I've got you."

"Unbind me.  Let me go!"

"Ah!" he returned, "I'll let you go.  I'll let you go to the moon,I'll let you go to the stars.  All in good time."

"Why have you lured me here?"

"Don't you know?" said he, with a deadly look.

"Why have you set upon me in the dark?"

"Because I mean to do it all myself.  One keeps a secret better thantwo.  O you enemy, you enemy!"

His enjoyment of the spectacle I furnished, as he sat with his armsfolded on the table, shaking his head at me and hugging himself,had a malignity in it that made me tremble.  As I watched him insilence, he put his hand into the corner at his side, and took up agun with a brass-bound stock.

"Do you know this?" said he, making as if he would take aim at me."Do you know where you saw it afore?  Speak, wolf!"

"Yes," I answered.

"You cost me that place.  You did.  Speak!"

"What else could I do?"

"You did that, and that would be enough, without more.  How daredyou to come betwixt me and a young woman I liked?"

"When did I?"

"When didn't you?  It was you as always give Old Orlick a bad nameto her."

"You gave it to yourself; you gained it for yourself.  I could havedone you no harm, if you had done yourself none."

"You're a liar.  And you'll take any pains, and spend any money, todrive me out of this country, will you?" said he, repeating mywords to Biddy in the last interview I had with her.  "Now, I'lltell you a piece of information.  It was never so well worth yourwhile to get me out of this country as it is to-night.  Ah!  If itwas all your money twenty times told, to the last brass farden!"  Ashe shook his heavy hand at me, with his mouth snarling like atiger's, I felt that it was true.

"What are you going to do to me?"

"I'm a going," said he, bringing his fist down upon the table with aheavy blow, and rising as the blow fell to give it greater force,--"I'm a going to have your life!"

He leaned forward staring at me, slowly unclenched his hand anddrew it across his mouth as if his mouth watered for me, and satdown again.

"You was always in Old Orlick's way since ever you was a child.  Yougoes out of his way this present night.  He'll have no more on you.You're dead."

I felt that I had come to the brink of my grave.  For a moment Ilooked wildly round my trap for any chance of escape; but there wasnone.

"More than that," said he, folding his arms on the table again, "Iwon't have a rag of you, I won't have a bone of you, left on earth.I'll put your body in the kiln,--I'd carry two such to it, on myShoulders,--and, let people suppose what they may of you, theyshall never know nothing."

My mind, with inconceivable rapidity followed out all theconsequences of such a death.  Estella's father would believe I haddeserted him, would be taken, would die accusing me; even Herbertwould doubt me, when he compared the letter I had left for himwith the fact that I had called at Miss Havisham's gate for only amoment; Joe and Biddy would never know how sorry I had been thatnight, none would ever know what I had suffered, how true I hadmeant to be, what an agony I had passed through.  The death closebefore me was terrible, but far more terrible than death was thedread of being misremembered after death.  And so quick were mythoughts, that I saw myself despised by unborn generations,--Estella's children, and their children,--while the wretch's wordswere yet on his lips.

"Now, wolf," said he, "afore I kill you like any other beast,--which is wot I mean to do and wot I have tied you up for,--I'llhave a good look at you and a good goad at you.  O you enemy!"

It had passed through my thoughts to cry out for help again; thoughfew could know better than I, the solitary nature of the spot, andthe hopelessness of aid.  But as he sat gloating over me, I wassupported by a scornful detestation of him that sealed my lips.Above all things, I resolved that I would not entreat him, and thatI would die making some last poor resistance to him.  Softened as mythoughts of all the rest of men were in that dire extremity; humblybeseeching pardon, as I did, of Heaven; melted at heart, as I was,by the thought that I had taken no farewell, and never nowcould take farewell of those who were dear to me, or could explainmyself to them, or ask for their compassion on my miserable errors,--still, if I could have killed him, even in dying, I would have doneit.

He had been drinking, and his eyes were red and bloodshot.  Aroundhis neck was slung a tin bottle, as I had often seen his meat anddrink slung about him in other days.  He brought the bottle to hislips, and took a fiery drink from it; and I smelt the strongspirits that I saw flash into his face.

"Wolf!" said he, folding his arms again, "Old Orlick's a going totell you somethink.  It was you as did for your shrew sister."

Again my mind, with its former inconceivable rapidity, hadexhausted the whole subject of the attack upon my sister, herillness, and her death, before his slow and hesitating speech hadformed these words.

"It was you, villain," said I.

"I tell you it was your doing,--I tell you it was done throughyou," he retorted, catching up the gun, and making a blow with thestock at the vacant air between us.  "I come upon her from behind,as I come upon you to-night.  I giv' it her!  I left her for dead,and if there had been a limekiln as nigh her as there is now nighyou, she shouldn't have come to life again.  But it warn't OldOrlick as did it; it was you.  You was favored, and he was bulliedand beat.  Old Orlick bullied and beat, eh?  Now you pays for it.  Youdone it; now you pays for it."

He drank again, and became more ferocious.  I saw by his tilting ofthe bottle that there was no great quantity left in it.  Idistinctly understood that he was working himself up with itscontents to make an end of me.  I knew that every drop it held wasa drop of my life.  I knew that when I was changed into a part ofthe vapor that had crept towards me but a little while before,like my own warning ghost, he would do as he had done in mysister's case,--make all haste to the town, and be seen slouchingabout there drinking at the alehouses.  My rapid mind pursued himto the town, made a picture of the street with him in it, andcontrasted its lights and life with the lonely marsh and the whitevapor creeping over it, into which I should have dissolved.

It was not only that I could have summed up years and years andyears while he said a dozen words, but that what he did saypresented pictures to me, and not mere words.  In the excited andexalted state of my brain, I could not think of a place withoutseeing it, or of persons without seeing them.  It is impossible tooverstate the vividness of these images, and yet I was so intent,all the time, upon him himself,--who would not be intent on thetiger crouching to spring!--that I knew of the slightest action ofhis fingers.

When he had drunk this second time, he rose from the bench on whichhe sat, and pushed the table aside.  Then, he took up the candle,and, shading it with his murderous hand so as to throw its light onme, stood before me, looking at me and enjoying the sight.

"Wolf, I'll tell you something more.  It was Old Orlick as youtumbled over on your stairs that night."

I saw the staircase with its extinguished lamps.  I saw the shadowsof the heavy stair-rails, thrown by the watchman's lantern on thewall.  I saw the rooms that I was never to see again; here, a doorhalf open; there, a door closed; all the articles of furniturearound.

"And why was Old Orlick there?  I'll tell you something more, wolf.You and her have pretty well hunted me out of this country, so faras getting a easy living in it goes, and I've took up with newcompanions, and new masters.  Some of 'em writes my letters when Iwants 'em wrote,--do you mind?--writes my letters, wolf!  Theywrites fifty hands; they're not like sneaking you, as writes butone.  I've had a firm mind and a firm will to have your life, sinceyou was down here at your sister's burying.  I han't seen a way toget you safe, and I've looked arter you to know your ins and outs.For, says Old Orlick to himself, 'Somehow or another I'll havehim!'  What!  When I looks for you, I finds your uncle Provis, eh?"

Mill Pond Bank, and Chinks's Basin, and the Old Green CopperRopewalk, all so clear and plain!  Provis in his rooms, the signalwhose use was over, pretty Clara, the good motherly woman, old BillBarley on his back, all drifting by, as on the swift stream of mylife fast running out to sea!

"You with a uncle too!  Why, I know'd you at Gargery's when you wasso small a wolf that I could have took your weazen betwixt thisfinger and thumb and chucked you away dead (as I'd thoughts o'doing, odd times, when I see you loitering amongst the pollards ona Sunday), and you hadn't found no uncles then.  No, not you!  Butwhen Old Orlick come for to hear that your uncle Provis hadmost like wore the leg-iron wot Old Orlick had picked up, filedasunder, on these meshes ever so many year ago, and wot he kep byhim till he dropped your sister with it, like a bullock, as hemeans to drop you--hey?--when he come for to hear that--hey?"

In his savage taunting, he flared the candle so close at me that Iturned my face aside to save it from the flame.

"Ah!" he cried, laughing, after doing it again, "the burnt childdreads the fire!  Old Orlick knowed you was burnt, Old Orlick knowedyou was smuggling your uncle Provis away, Old Orlick's a match foryou and know'd you'd come to-night!  Now I'll tell you somethingmore, wolf, and this ends it.  There's them that's as good a matchfor your uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for you.  Let him 'warethem, when he's lost his nevvy!  Let him 'ware them, when no mancan't find a rag of his dear relation's clothes, nor yet a bone ofhis body.  There's them that can't and that won't have Magwitch,--yes, I know the name!--alive in the same land with them, andthat's had such sure information of him when he was alive inanother land, as that he couldn't and shouldn't leave it unbeknownand put them in danger.  P'raps it's them that writes fifty hands,and that's not like sneaking you as writes but one.  'WareCompeyson, Magwitch, and the gallows!"

He flared the candle at me again, smoking my face and hair, and foran instant blinding me, and turned his powerful back as he replacedthe light on the table.  I had thought a prayer, and had been withJoe and Biddy and Herbert, before he turned towards me again.

There was a clear space of a few feet between the table and theopposite wall.  Within this space, he now slouched backwards andforwards.  His great strength seemed to sit stronger upon him thanever before, as he did this with his hands hanging loose and heavyat his sides, and with his eyes scowling at me.  I had no grain ofhope left.  Wild as my inward hurry was, and wonderful the force ofthe pictures that rushed by me instead of thoughts, I could yetclearly understand that, unless he had resolved that I was within afew moments of surely perishing out of all human knowledge, hewould never have told me what he had told.

Of a sudden, he stopped, took the cork out of his bottle, andtossed it away.  Light as it was, I heard it fall like a plummet.  Heswallowed slowly, tilting up the bottle by little and little, andnow he looked at me no more.  The last few drops of liquor he pouredinto the palm of his hand, and licked up.  Then, with a sudden hurryof violence and swearing horribly, he threw the bottle from him,and stooped; and I saw in his hand a stone-hammer with a long heavyhandle.

The resolution I had made did not desert me, for, without utteringone vain word of appeal to him, I shouted out with all my might,and struggled with all my might.  It was only my head and my legsthat I could move, but to that extent I struggled with all theforce, until then unknown, that was within me.  In the same instantI heard responsive shouts, saw figures and a gleam of light dash inat the door, heard voices and tumult, and saw Orlick emerge from astruggle of men, as if it were tumbling water, clear the table at aleap, and fly out into the night.

After a blank, I found that I was lying unbound, on the floor, inthe same place, with my head on some one's knee.  My eyes were fixedon the ladder against the wall, when I came to myself,--had openedon it before my mind saw it,--and thus as I recoveredconsciousness, I knew that I was in the place where I had lost it.

Too indifferent at first, even to look round and ascertain whosupported me, I was lying looking at the ladder, when there camebetween me and it a face.  The face of Trabb's boy!

"I think he's all right!" said Trabb's boy, in a sober voice; "butain't he just pale though!"

At these words, the face of him who supported me looked over intomine, and I saw my supporter to be--

"Herbert!  Great Heaven!"

"Softly," said Herbert.  "Gently, Handel.  Don't be too eager."

"And our old comrade, Startop!" I cried, as he too bent over me.

"Remember what he is going to assist us in," said Herbert, "and becalm."

The allusion made me spring up; though I dropped again from thepain in my arm.  "The time has not gone by, Herbert, has it?  Whatnight is to-night?  How long have I been here?"  For, I had a strangeand strong misgiving that I had been lying there a long time - aday and a night,--two days and nights,--more.

"The time has not gone by.  It is still Monday night."

"Thank God!"

"And you have all to-morrow, Tuesday, to rest in," said Herbert."But you can't help groaning, my dear Handel.  What hurt have yougot?  Can you stand?"

"Yes, yes," said I, "I can walk.  I have no hurt but in thisthrobbing arm."

They laid it bare, and did what they could.  It was violentlyswollen and inflamed, and I could scarcely endure to have ittouched.  But, they tore up their handkerchiefs to make freshbandages, and carefully replaced it in the sling, until we couldget to the town and obtain some cooling lotion to put upon it.  In alittle while we had shut the door of the dark and emptysluice-house, and were passing through the quarry on our way back.Trabb's boy--Trabb's overgrown young man now--went before us witha lantern, which was the light I had seen come in at the door.  But,the moon was a good two hours higher than when I had last seen thesky, and the night, though rainy, was much lighter.  The white vaporof the kiln was passing from us as we went by, and as I hadthought a prayer before, I thought a thanksgiving now.

Entreating Herbert to tell me how he had come to my rescue,--whichat first he had flatly refused to do, but had insisted on myremaining quiet,--I learnt that I had in my hurry dropped theletter, open, in our chambers, where he, coming home to bring withhim Startop whom he had met in the street on his way to me, foundit, very soon after I was gone.  Its tone made him uneasy, and themore so because of the inconsistency between it and the hastyletter I had left for him.  His uneasiness increasing instead ofsubsiding, after a quarter of an hour's consideration, he set offfor the coach-office with Startop, who volunteered his company, tomake inquiry when the next coach went down.  Finding that theafternoon coach was gone, and finding that his uneasiness grew intopositive alarm, as obstacles came in his way, he resolved to followin a post-chaise.  So he and Startop arrived at the Blue Boar,fully expecting there to find me, or tidings of me; but, findingneither, went on to Miss Havisham's, where they lost me.  Hereuponthey went back to the hotel (doubtless at about the time when I washearing the popular local version of my own story) to refreshthemselves and to get some one to guide them out upon the marshes.Among the loungers under the Boar's archway happened to be Trabb'sBoy,--true to his ancient habit of happening to be everywhere wherehe had no business,--and Trabb's boy had seen me passing from MissHavisham's in the direction of my dining-place.  Thus Trabb's boybecame their guide, and with him they went out to the sluice-house,though by the town way to the marshes, which I had avoided.  Now, asthey went along, Herbert reflected, that I might, after all, havebeen brought there on some genuine and serviceable errand tendingto Provis's safety, and, bethinking himself that in that caseinterruption must be mischievous, left his guide and Startop on theedge of the quarry, and went on by himself, and stole round thehouse two or three times, endeavouring to ascertain whether all wasright within.  As he could hear nothing but indistinct sounds of onedeep rough voice (this was while my mind was so busy), he even atlast began to doubt whether I was there, when suddenly I cried outloudly, and he answered the cries, and rushed in, closely followedby the other two.

When I told Herbert what had passed within the house, he was forour immediately going before a magistrate in the town, late atnight as it was, and getting out a warrant.  But, I had alreadyconsidered that such a course, by detaining us there, or binding usto come back, might be fatal to Provis.  There was no gainsayingthis difficulty, and we relinquished all thoughts of pursuingOrlick at that time.  For the present, under the circumstances, wedeemed it prudent to make rather light of the matter to Trabb'sboy; who, I am convinced, would have been much affected bydisappointment, if he had known that his intervention saved me fromthe limekiln.  Not that Trabb's boy was of a malignant nature, butthat he had too much spare vivacity, and that it was in hisconstitution to want variety and excitement at anybody's expense.When we parted, I presented him with two guineas (which seemed tomeet his views), and told him that I was sorry ever to have had anill opinion of him (which made no impression on him at all).

Wednesday being so close upon us, we determined to go back toLondon that night, three in the post-chaise; the rather, as weshould then be clear away before the night's adventure began to betalked of.  Herbert got a large bottle of stuff for my arm; and bydint of having this stuff dropped over it all the night through, Iwas just able to bear its pain on the journey.  It was daylight whenwe reached the Temple, and I went at once to bed, and lay in bedall day.

My terror, as I lay there, of falling ill, and being unfitted fortomorrow, was so besetting, that I wonder it did not disable me ofitself.  It would have done so, pretty surely, in conjunction withthe mental wear and tear I had suffered, but for the unnaturalstrain upon me that to-morrow was.  So anxiously looked forward to,charged with such consequences, its results so impenetrably hidden,though so near.

No precaution could have been more obvious than our refraining fromcommunication with him that day; yet this again increased myrestlessness.  I started at every footstep and every sound,believing that he was discovered and taken, and this was themessenger to tell me so.  I persuaded myself that I knew he wastaken; that there was something more upon my mind than a fear or apresentiment; that the fact had occurred, and I had a mysteriousknowledge of it.  As the days wore on, and no ill news came, as theday closed in and darkness fell, my overshadowing dread of beingdisabled by illness before to-morrow morning altogether masteredme.  My burning arm throbbed, and my burning head throbbed, and Ifancied I was beginning to wander.  I counted up to high numbers, tomake sure of myself, and repeated passages that I knew in prose andverse.  It happened sometimes that in the mere escape of a fatiguedmind, I dozed for some moments or forgot; then I would say tomyself with a start, "Now it has come, and I am turning delirious!"

They kept me very quiet all day, and kept my arm constantlydressed, and gave me cooling drinks.  Whenever I fell asleep, Iawoke with the notion I had had in the sluice-house, that a longtime had elapsed and the opportunity to save him was gone.  Aboutmidnight I got out of bed and went to Herbert, with the convictionthat I had been asleep for four-and-twenty hours, and thatWednesday was past.  It was the last self-exhausting effort of myfretfulness, for after that I slept soundly.

Wednesday morning was dawning when I looked out of window.  Thewinking lights upon the bridges were already pale, the coming sunwas like a marsh of fire on the horizon.  The river, still dark andmysterious, was spanned by bridges that were turning coldly gray,with here and there at top a warm touch from the burning in thesky.  As I looked along the clustered roofs, with church-towers andspires shooting into the unusually clear air, the sun rose up, anda veil seemed to be drawn from the river, and millions of sparklesburst out upon its waters.  From me too, a veil seemed to be drawn,and I felt strong and well.

Herbert lay asleep in his bed, and our old fellow-student layasleep on the sofa.  I could not dress myself without help; but Imade up the fire, which was still burning, and got some coffeeready for them.  In good time they too started up strong and well,and we admitted the sharp morning air at the windows, and looked atthe tide that was still flowing towards us.

"When it turns at nine o'clock," said Herbert, cheerfully, "lookout for us, and stand ready, you over there at Mill Pond Bank!"

Chapter LIV

It was one of those March days when the sun shines hot and the windblows cold:  when it is summer in the light, and winter in theshade.  We had out pea-coats with us, and I took a bag.  Of all myworldly possessions I took no more than the few necessaries thatfilled the bag.  Where I might go, what I might do, or when I mightreturn, were questions utterly unknown to me; nor did I vex my mindwith them, for it was wholly set on Provis's safety.  I onlywondered for the passing moment, as I stopped at the door andlooked back, under what altered circumstances I should next seethose rooms, if ever.

We loitered down to the Temple stairs, and stood loitering there,as if we were not quite decided to go upon the water at all.  Ofcourse, I had taken care that the boat should be ready andeverything in order.  After a little show of indecision, which therewere none to see but the two or three amphibious creaturesbelonging to our Temple stairs, we went on board and cast off;Herbert in the bow, I steering.  It was then about high-water,--half-past eight.

Our plan was this.  The tide, beginning to run down at nine, andbeing with us until three, we intended still to creep on after ithad turned, and row against it until dark.  We should then be wellin those long reaches below Gravesend, between Kent and Essex,where the river is broad and solitary, where the water-sideinhabitants are very few, and where lone public-houses arescattered here and there, of which we could choose one for aresting-place.  There, we meant to lie by all night.  The steamerfor Hamburg and the steamer for Rotterdam would start from Londonat about nine on Thursday morning.  We should know at what time toexpect them, according to where we were, and would hail the first;so that, if by any accident we were not taken abroad, we should haveanother chance.  We knew the distinguishing marks of each vessel.

The relief of being at last engaged in the execution of thepurpose was so great to me that I felt it difficult to realize thecondition in which I had been a few hours before.  The crisp air,the sunlight, the movement on the river, and the moving riveritself,--the road that ran with us, seeming to sympathize with us,animate us, and encourage us on,--freshened me with new hope.  Ifelt mortified to be of so little use in the boat; but, there werefew better oarsmen than my two friends, and they rowed with asteady stroke that was to last all day.

At that time, the steam-traffic on the Thames was far below itspresent extent, and watermen's boats were far more numerous.  Ofbarges, sailing colliers, and coasting-traders, there were perhaps,as many as now; but of steam-ships, great and small, not a titheor a twentieth part so many.  Early as it was, there were plenty ofscullers going here and there that morning, and plenty of bargesdropping down with the tide; the navigation of the river betweenbridges, in an open boat, was a much easier and commoner matter inthose days than it is in these; and we went ahead among many skiffsand wherries briskly.

Old London Bridge was soon passed, and old Billingsgate Market withits oyster-boats and Dutchmen, and the White Tower and Traitor'sGate, and we were in among the tiers of shipping.  Here were theLeith, Aberdeen, and Glasgow steamers, loading and unloading goods,and looking immensely high out of the water as we passed alongside;here, were colliers by the score and score, with the coal-whippersplunging off stages on deck, as counterweights to measures of coalswinging up, which were then rattled over the side into barges;here, at her moorings was to-morrow's steamer for Rotterdam, ofwhich we took good notice; and here to-morrow's for Hamburg, underwhose bowsprit we crossed.  And now I, sitting in the stern, couldsee, with a faster beating heart, Mill Pond Bank and Mill Pondstairs.

"Is he there?" said Herbert.

"Not yet."

"Right!  He was not to come down till he saw us.  Can you see hissignal?"

"Not well from here; but I think I see it.--Now I see him!  Pullboth.  Easy, Herbert.  Oars!"

We touched the stairs lightly for a single moment, and he was onboard, and we were off again.  He had a boat-cloak with him, and ablack canvas bag; and he looked as like a river-pilot as my heartcould have wished.  

"Dear boy!" he said, putting his arm on my shoulder, as he took his seat.  "Faithful dear boy, well done.  Thankye, thankye!"

Again among the tiers of shipping, in and out, avoiding rustychain-cables frayed hempen hawsers and bobbing buoys, sinking forthe moment floating broken baskets, scattering floating chips ofwood and shaving, cleaving floating scum of coal, in and out, underthe figure-head of the John of Sunderland making a speech to thewinds (as is done by many Johns), and the Betsy of Yarmouth with afirm formality of bosom and her knobby eyes starting two inches outof her head; in and out, hammers going in ship-builders' yards, sawsgoing at timber, clashing engines going at things unknown, pumpsgoing in leaky ships, capstans going, ships going out to sea, andunintelligible sea-creatures roaring curses over the bulwarks atrespondent lightermen, in and out,--out at last upon the clearerriver, where the ships' boys might take their fenders in, no longerfishing in troubled waters with them over the side, and where thefestooned sails might fly out to the wind.

At the Stairs where we had taken him abroad, and ever since, I hadlooked warily for any token of our being suspected.  I had seennone.  We certainly had not been, and at that time as certainly wewere not either attended or followed by any boat.  If we had beenwaited on by any boat, I should have run in to shore, and haveobliged her to go on, or to make her purpose evident.  But we heldour own without any appearance of molestation.

He had his boat-cloak on him, and looked, as I have said, a naturalpart of the scene.  It was remarkable (but perhaps the wretched lifehe had led accounted for it) that he was the least anxious of anyof us.  He was not indifferent, for he told me that he hoped to liveto see his gentleman one of the best of gentlemen in a foreigncountry; he was not disposed to be passive or resigned, as Iunderstood it; but he had no notion of meeting danger half way.When it came upon him, he confronted it, but it must come before hetroubled himself.

"If you knowed, dear boy," he said to me, "what it is to sit herealonger my dear boy and have my smoke, arter having been day by daybetwixt four walls, you'd envy me.  But you don't know what it is."

"I think I know the delights of freedom," I answered.

"Ah," said he, shaking his head gravely.  "But you don't know itequal to me.  You must have been under lock and key, dear boy, toknow it equal to me,--but I ain't a going to be low."

It occurred to me as inconsistent, that, for any mastering idea, heshould have endangered his freedom, and even his life.  But Ireflected that perhaps freedom without danger was too much apartfrom all the habit of his existence to be to him what it would beto another man.  I was not far out, since he said, after smoking alittle:--

"You see, dear boy, when I was over yonder, t'other side the world,I was always a looking to this side; and it come flat to be there,for all I was a growing rich.  Everybody knowed Magwitch, andMagwitch could come, and Magwitch could go, and nobody's head wouldbe troubled about him.  They ain't so easy concerning me here, dearboy,--wouldn't be, leastwise, if they knowed where I was."

"If all goes well," said I, "you will be perfectly free and safeagain within a few hours."

"Well," he returned, drawing a long breath, "I hope so."

"And think so?"

He dipped his hand in the water over the boat's gunwale, and said,smiling with that softened air upon him which was not new to me:--

"Ay, I s'pose I think so, dear boy.  We'd be puzzled to be morequiet and easy-going than we are at present.  But--it's a flowingso soft and pleasant through the water, p'raps, as makes me thinkit--I was a thinking through my smoke just then, that we can nomore see to the bottom of the next few hours than we can see tothe bottom of this river what I catches hold of.  Nor yet we can'tno more hold their tide than I can hold this.  And it's run throughmy fingers and gone, you see!" holding up his dripping hand.

"But for your face I should think you were a little despondent,"said I.

"Not a bit on it, dear boy!  It comes of flowing on so quiet, and ofthat there rippling at the boat's head making a sort of a Sundaytune.  Maybe I'm a growing a trifle old besides."

He put his pipe back in his mouth with an undisturbed expression offace, and sat as composed and contented as if we were already outof England.  Yet he was as submissive to a word of advice as if hehad been in constant terror; for, when we ran ashore to get somebottles of beer into the boat, and he was stepping out, I hintedthat I thought he would be safest where he was, and he said.  "Doyou, dear boy?" and quietly sat down again.

The air felt cold upon the river, but it was a bright day, and thesunshine was very cheering.  The tide ran strong, I took care tolose none of it, and our steady stroke carried us on thoroughlywell.  By imperceptible degrees, as the tide ran out, we lost moreand more of the nearer woods and hills, and dropped lower and lowerbetween the muddy banks, but the tide was yet with us when we wereoff Gravesend.  As our charge was wrapped in his cloak, I purposelypassed within a boat or two's length of the floating Custom House,and so out to catch the stream, alongside of two emigrant ships,and under the bows of a large transport with troops on theforecastle looking down at us.  And soon the tide began to slacken,and the craft lying at anchor to swing, and presently they had allswung round, and the ships that were taking advantage of the newtide to get up to the Pool began to crowd upon us in a fleet, andwe kept under the shore, as much out of the strength of the tidenow as we could, standing carefully off from low shallows andmudbanks.

Our oarsmen were so fresh, by dint of having occasionally let herdrive with the tide for a minute or two, that a quarter of anhour's rest proved full as much as they wanted.  We got ashore amongsome slippery stones while we ate and drank what we had with us,and looked about.  It was like my own marsh country, flat andmonotonous, and with a dim horizon; while the winding river turnedand turned, and the great floating buoys upon it turned and turned,and everything else seemed stranded and still.  For now the lastof the fleet of ships was round the last low point we had headed;and the last green barge, straw-laden, with a brown sail, hadfollowed; and some ballast-lighters, shaped like a child's firstrude imitation of a boat, lay low in the mud; and a little squatshoal-lighthouse on open piles stood crippled in the mud on stiltsand crutches; and slimy stakes stuck out of the mud, and slimystones stuck out of the mud, and red landmarks and tidemarks stuckout of the mud, and an old landing-stage and an old roofless buildingslipped into the mud, and all about us was stagnation and mud.

We pushed off again, and made what way we could.  It was much harderwork now, but Herbert and Startop persevered, and rowed and rowedand rowed until the sun went down.  By that time the river hadlifted us a little, so that we could see above the bank.  There wasthe red sun, on the low level of the shore, in a purple haze, fastdeepening into black; and there was the solitary flat marsh; andfar away there were the rising grounds, between which and us thereseemed to be no life, save here and there in the foreground amelancholy gull.

As the night was fast falling, and as the moon, being past thefull, would not rise early, we held a little council; a short one,for clearly our course was to lie by at the first lonely tavern wecould find.  So, they plied their oars once more, and I looked outfor anything like a house.  Thus we held on, speaking little, forfour or five dull miles.  It was very cold, and, a collier coming byus, with her galley-fire smoking and flaring, looked like acomfortable home.  The night was as dark by this time as it would beuntil morning; and what light we had, seemed to come more from theriver than the sky, as the oars in their dipping struck at a fewreflected stars.

At this dismal time we were evidently all possessed by the idea thatwe were followed.  As the tide made, it flapped heavily at irregularintervals against the shore; and whenever such a sound came, one orother of us was sure to start, and look in that direction.  Here andthere, the set of the current had worn down the bank into a littlecreek, and we were all suspicious of such places, and eyed themnervously.  Sometimes, "What was that ripple?" one of us would sayin a low voice.  Or another, "Is that a boat yonder?"  Andafterwards we would fall into a dead silence, and I would sitimpatiently thinking with what an unusual amount of noise the oarsworked in the thowels.

At length we descried a light and a roof, and presently afterwardsran alongside a little causeway made of stones that had been pickedup hard by.  Leaving the rest in the boat, I stepped ashore, andfound the light to be in a window of a public-house.  It was a dirtyplace enough, and I dare say not unknown to smuggling adventurers;but there was a good fire in the kitchen, and there were eggs andbacon to eat, and various liquors to drink.  Also, there were twodouble-bedded rooms,--"such as they were," the landlord said.  Noother company was in the house than the landlord, his wife, and agrizzled male creature, the "Jack" of the little causeway, who wasas slimy and smeary as if he had been low-water mark too.

With this assistant, I went down to the boat again, and we all cameashore, and brought out the oars, and rudder and boat-hook, andall else, and hauled her up for the night.  We made a very good mealby the kitchen fire, and then apportioned the bedrooms:  Herbert andStartop were to occupy one; I and our charge the other.  We foundthe air as carefully excluded from both, as if air were fatal tolife; and there were more dirty clothes and bandboxes under thebeds than I should have thought the family possessed.  But weconsidered ourselves well off, notwithstanding, for a more solitaryplace we could not have found.

While we were comforting ourselves by the fire after our meal, theJack--who was sitting in a corner, and who had a bloated pair ofshoes on, which he had exhibited while we were eating our eggs andbacon, as interesting relics that he had taken a few days ago fromthe feet of a drowned seaman washed ashore--asked me if we hadseen a four-oared galley going up with the tide?  When I told himNo, he said she must have gone down then, and yet she "took uptoo," when she left there.

"They must ha' thought better on't for some reason or another,"said the Jack, "and gone down."

"A four-oared galley, did you say?" said I.

"A four," said the Jack, "and two sitters."

"Did they come ashore here?"

"They put in with a stone two-gallon jar for some beer.  I'dha' been glad to pison the beer myself," said the Jack, "or put somerattling physic in it."

"Why?"

"I know why," said the Jack.  He spoke in a slushy voice, as if muchmud had washed into his throat.

"He thinks," said the landlord, a weakly meditative man with a paleeye, who seemed to rely greatly on his Jack,--"he thinks they was,what they wasn't."

"I knows what I thinks," observed the Jack.

"You thinks Custum 'Us, Jack?" said the landlord.

"I do," said the Jack.

"Then you're wrong, Jack."

"AM I!"

In the infinite meaning of his reply and his boundless confidencein his views, the Jack took one of his bloated shoes off, lookedinto it, knocked a few stones out of it on the kitchen floor, andput it on again.  He did this with the air of a Jack who was soright that he could afford to do anything.

"Why, what do you make out that they done with their buttons then,Jack?" asked the landlord, vacillating weakly.

"Done with their buttons?" returned the Jack.  "Chucked 'emoverboard.  Swallered 'em.  Sowed 'em, to come up small salad.  Donewith their buttons!"

"Don't be cheeky, Jack," remonstrated the landlord, in a melancholyand pathetic way.

"A Custum 'Us officer knows what to do with his Buttons," said theJack, repeating the obnoxious word with the greatest contempt,"when they comes betwixt him and his own light.  A four and twositters don't go hanging and hovering, up with one tide and downwith another, and both with and against another, without therebeing Custum 'Us at the bottom of it."  Saying which he went out indisdain; and the landlord, having no one to reply upon, found itimpracticable to pursue the subject.

This dialogue made us all uneasy, and me very uneasy.  The dismalwind was muttering round the house, the tide was flapping at theshore, and I had a feeling that we were caged and threatened.  Afour-oared galley hovering about in so unusual a way as to attractthis notice was an ugly circumstance that I could not get rid of.When I had induced Provis to go up to bed, I went outside with mytwo companions (Startop by this time knew the state of the case),and held another council.  Whether we should remain at the houseuntil near the steamer's time, which would be about one in theafternoon, or whether we should put off early in the morning,  wasthe question we discussed.  On the whole we deemed it the bettercourse to lie where we were, until within an hour or so of thesteamer's time, and then to get out in her track, and drift easilywith the tide.  Having settled to do this, we returned into thehouse and went to bed.

I lay down with the greater part of my clothes on, and slept wellfor a few hours.  When I awoke, the wind had risen, and the sign ofthe house (the Ship) was creaking and banging about, with noisesthat startled me.  Rising softly, for my charge lay fast asleep, Ilooked out of the window.  It commanded the causeway where we hadhauled up our boat, and, as my eyes adapted themselves to the lightof the clouded moon, I saw two men looking into her.  They passed byunder the window, looking at nothing else, and they did not go downto the landing-place which I could discern to be empty, but struckacross the marsh in the direction of the Nore.

My first impulse was to call up Herbert, and show him the two mengoing away.  But reflecting, before I got into his room, which wasat the back of the house and adjoined mine, that he and Startop hadhad a harder day than I, and were fatigued, I forbore.  Going backto my window, I could see the two men moving over the marsh.  Inthat light, however, I soon lost them, and, feeling very cold, laydown to think of the matter, and fell asleep again.

We were up early.  As we walked to and fro, all four together,before breakfast, I deemed it right to recount what I had seen.Again our charge was the least anxious of the party.  It was verylikely that the men belonged to the Custom House, he said quietly,and that they had no thought of us.  I tried to persuade myself thatit was so,--as, indeed, it might easily be.  However, I proposedthat he and I should walk away together to a distant point we couldsee, and that the boat should take us aboard there, or as nearthere as might prove feasible, at about noon.  This being considereda good precaution, soon after breakfast he and I set forth, withoutsaying anything at the tavern.

He smoked his pipe as we went along, and sometimes stopped to clapme on the shoulder.  One would have supposed that it was I who wasin danger, not he, and that he was reassuring me.  We spoke verylittle.  As we approached the point, I begged him to remain in asheltered place, while I went on to reconnoitre; for it wastowards it that the men had passed in the night.  He complied, and Iwent on alone.  There was no boat off the point, nor any boat drawnup anywhere near it, nor were there any signs of the men havingembarked there.  But, to be sure, the tide was high, and there mighthave been some footpints under water.

When he looked out from his shelter in the distance, and saw that Iwaved my hat to him to come up, he rejoined me, and there wewaited; sometimes lying on the bank, wrapped in our coats, andsometimes moving about to warm ourselves, until we saw our boatcoming round.  We got aboard easily, and rowed out into the track ofthe steamer.  By that time it wanted but ten minutes of one o'clock,and we began to look out for her smoke.

But, it was half-past one before we saw her smoke, and soonafterwards we saw behind it the smoke of another steamer.  As theywere coming on at full speed, we got the two bags ready, and tookthat opportunity of saying good by to Herbert and Startop.  We hadall shaken hands cordially, and neither Herbert's eyes nor minewere quite dry, when I saw a four-oared galley shoot out from underthe bank but a little way ahead of us, and row out into the sametrack.

A stretch of shore had been as yet between us and the steamer'ssmoke, by reason of the bend and wind of the river; but now she wasvisible, coming head on.  I called to Herbert and Startop to keepbefore the tide, that she might see us lying by for her, and Iadjured Provis to sit quite still, wrapped in his cloak.  Heanswered cheerily, "Trust to me, dear boy," and sat like a statue.Meantime the galley, which was very skilfully handled, had crossedus, let us come up with her, and fallen alongside.  Leaving justroom enough for the play of the oars, she kept alongside, driftingwhen we drifted, and pulling a stroke or two when we pulled.  Of thetwo sitters one held the rudder-lines, and looked at us attentively,--as did all the rowers; the other sitter was wrapped up, much asProvis was, and seemed to shrink, and whisper some instruction tothe steerer as he looked at us.  Not a word was spoken in eitherboat.

Startop could make out, after a few minutes, which steamer wasfirst, and gave me the word "Hamburg," in a low voice, as we satface to face.  She was nearing us very fast, and the beating of herpeddles grew louder and louder.  I felt as if her shadow wereabsolutely upon us, when the galley hailed us.  I answered.

"You have a returned Transport there," said the man who held thelines.  "That's the man, wrapped in the cloak.  His name is AbelMagwitch, otherwise Provis.  I apprehend that man, and call upon himto surrender, and you to assist."

At the same moment, without giving any audible direction to hiscrew, he ran the galley abroad of us.  They had pulled one suddenstroke ahead, had got their oars in, had run athwart us, and wereholding on to our gunwale, before we knew what they were doing.This caused great confusion on board the steamer, and I heard themcalling to us, and heard the order given to stop the paddles, andheard them stop, but felt her driving down upon us irresistibly.  Inthe same moment, I saw the steersman of the galley lay his hand onhis prisoner's shoulder, and saw that both boats were swinginground with the force of the tide, and saw that all hands on boardthe steamer were running forward quite frantically.  Still, in thesame moment, I saw the prisoner start up, lean across his captor,and pull the cloak from the neck of the shrinking sitter in thegalley.  Still in the same moment, I saw that the face disclosed,was the face of the other convict of long ago.  Still, in the samemoment, I saw the face tilt backward with a white terror on it thatI shall never forget, and heard a great cry on board the steamer,and a loud splash in the water, and felt the boat sink from underme.

It was but for an instant that I seemed to struggle with a thousandmill-weirs and a thousand flashes of light; that instant past, Iwas taken on board the galley.  Herbert was there, and Startop wasthere; but our boat was gone, and the two convicts were gone.

What with the cries aboard the steamer, and the furious blowing offof her steam, and her driving on, and our driving on, I could notat first distinguish sky from water or shore from shore; but thecrew of the galley righted her with great speed, and, pullingcertain swift strong strokes ahead, lay upon their oars, every manlooking silently and eagerly at the water astern.  Presently a darkobject was seen in it, bearing towards us on the tide.  No manspoke, but the steersman held up his hand, and all softly backedwater, and kept the boat straight and true before it.  As it camenearer, I saw it to be Magwitch, swimming, but not swimming freely.He was taken on board, and instantly manacled at the wrists andankles.

The galley was kept steady, and the silent, eager look-out at thewater was resumed.  But, the Rotterdam steamer now came up, andapparently not understanding what had happened, came on at speed.By the time she had been hailed and stopped, both steamers weredrifting away from us, and we were rising and falling in a troubledwake of water.  The look-out was kept, long after all was stillagain and the two steamers were gone; but everybody knew that itwas hopeless now.

At length we gave it up, and pulled under the shore towards thetavern we had lately left, where we were received with no littlesurprise.  Here I was able to get some comforts for Magwitch,--Provis no longer,--who had received some very severe injury in theChest, and a deep cut in the head.

He told me that he believed himself to have gone under the keel ofthe steamer, and to have been struck on the head in rising.  Theinjury to his chest (which rendered his breathing extremelypainful) he thought he had received against the side of the galley.He added that he did not pretend to say what he might or might nothave done to Compeyson, but that, in the moment of his laying hishand on his cloak to identify him, that villain had staggered upand staggered back, and they had both gone overboard together, whenthe sudden wrenching of him (Magwitch) out of our boat, and theendeavor of his captor to keep him in it, had capsized us.  He toldme in a whisper that they had gone down fiercely locked in eachother's arms, and that there had been a struggle under water, andthat he had disengaged himself, struck out, and swum away.

I never had any reason to doubt the exact truth of what he thustold me.  The officer who steered the galley gave the same accountof their going overboard.

When I asked this officer's permission to change the prisoner's wetclothes by purchasing any spare garments I could get at thepublic-house, he gave it readily:  merely observing that he musttake charge of everything his prisoner had about him.  So thepocket-book which had once been in my hands passed into theofficer's.  He further gave me leave to accompany the prisoner toLondon; but declined to accord that grace to my two friends.

The Jack at the Ship was instructed where the drowned man had gonedown, and undertook to search for the body in the places where itwas likeliest to come ashore.  His interest in its recovery seemedto me to be much heightened when he heard that it had stockings on.Probably, it took about a dozen drowned men to fit him outcompletely; and that may have been the reason why the differentarticles of his dress were in various stages of decay.

We remained at the public-house until the tide turned, and thenMagwitch was carried down to the galley and put on board.  Herbertand Startop were to get to London by land, as soon as they could.We had a doleful parting, and when I took my place by Magwitch'sside, I felt that that was my place henceforth while he lived.

For now, my repugnance to him had all melted away; and in theHunted, wounded, shackled creature who held my hand in his, I onlysaw a man who had meant to be my benefactor, and who had feltaffectionately, gratefully, and generously, towards me with greatconstancy through a series of years.  I only saw in him a muchbetter man than I had been to Joe.

His breathing became more difficult and painful as the night drewon, and often he could not repress a groan.  I tried to rest him onthe arm I could use, in any easy position; but it was dreadful tothink that I could not be sorry at heart for his being badly hurt,since it was unquestionably best that he should die.  That therewere, still living, people enough who were able and willing toidentify him, I could not doubt.  That he would be lenientlytreated, I could not hope.  He who had been presented in the worstlight at his trial, who had since broken prison and had been triedagain, who had returned from transportation under a life sentence,and who had occasioned the death of the man who was the cause ofhis arrest.

As we returned towards the setting sun we had yesterday left behindus, and as the stream of our hopes seemed all running back, I toldhim how grieved I was to think that he had come home for my sake.

"Dear boy," he answered, "I'm quite content to take my chance.  I'veseen my boy, and he can be a gentleman without me."

No.  I had thought about that, while we had been there side by side.No.  Apart from any inclinations of my own, I understood Wemmick'shint now.  I foresaw that, being convicted, his possessions would beforfeited to the Crown.

"Lookee here, dear boy," said he "It's best as a gentleman shouldnot be knowed to belong to me now.  Only come to see me as if youcome by chance alonger Wemmick.  Sit where I can see you when I amswore to, for the last o' many times, and I don't ask no more."

"I will never stir from your side," said I, "when I am suffered tobe near you.  Please God, I will be as true to you as you have beento me!"

I felt his hand tremble as it held mine, and he turned his faceaway as he lay in the bottom of the boat, and I heard that oldsound in his throat,--softened now, like all the rest of him.  Itwas a good thing that he had touched this point, for it put into mymind what I might not otherwise have thought of until too late,--that he need never know how his hopes of enriching me had perished.

Chapter LV

He was taken to the Police Court next day, and would have beenimmediately committed for trial, but that it was necessary to senddown for an old officer of the prison-ship from which he had onceescaped, to speak to his identity.  Nobody doubted it; butCompeyson, who had meant to depose to it, was tumbling on thetides, dead, and it happened that there was not at that time anyprison officer in London who could give the required evidence.  Ihad gone direct to Mr. Jaggers at his private house, on my arrivalover night, to retain his assistance, and Mr. Jaggers on theprisoner's behalf would admit nothing.  It was the sole resource;for he told me that the case must be over in five minutes when thewitness was there, and that no power on earth could prevent itsgoing against us.

I imparted to Mr. Jaggers my design of keeping him in ignorance ofthe fate of his wealth.  Mr. Jaggers was querulous and angry with mefor having "let it slip through my fingers," and said we mustmemorialize by and by, and try at all events for some of it.  Buthe did not conceal from me that, although there might be many casesin which the forfeiture would not be exacted, there were nocircumstances in this case to make it one of them.  I understoodthat very well.  I was not related to the outlaw, or connected withhim by any recognizable tie; he had put his hand to no writing orsettlement in my favor before his apprehension, and to do so nowwould be idle.  I had no claim, and I finally resolved, and everafterwards abided by the resolution, that my heart should never besickened with the hopeless task of attempting to establish one.

There appeared to be reason for supposing that the drowned informerhad hoped for a reward out of this forfeiture, and had obtainedsome accurate knowledge of Magwitch's affairs.  When his body wasfound, many miles from the scene of his death, and so horriblydisfigured that he was only recognizable by the contents of hispockets, notes were still legible, folded in a case he carried.Among these were the name of a banking-house in New South Wales,where a sum of money was, and the designation of certain lands ofconsiderable value.  Both these heads of information were in a listthat Magwitch, while in prison, gave to Mr. Jaggers, of thepossessions he supposed I should inherit.  His ignorance, poorfellow, at last served him; he never mistrusted but that myinheritance was quite safe, with Mr. Jaggers's aid.

After three days' delay, during which the crown prosecution stoodover for the production of the witness from the prison-ship, thewitness came, and completed the easy case.  He was committed to takehis trial at the next Sessions, which would come on in a month.

It was at this dark time of my life that Herbert returned home oneevening, a good deal cast down, and said,--

"My dear Handel, I fear I shall soon have to leave you."

His partner having prepared me for that, I was less surprised thanhe thought.

"We shall lose a fine opportunity if I put off going to Cairo, andI am very much afraid I must go, Handel, when you most need me."

"Herbert, I shall always need you, because I shall always love you;but my need is no greater now than at another time."

"You will be so lonely."

"I have not leisure to think of that," said I.  "You know that I amalways with him to the full extent of the time allowed, and that Ishould be with him all day long, if I could.  And when I come awayfrom him, you know that my thoughts are with him."

The dreadful condition to which he was brought, was so appalling toboth of us, that we could not refer to it in plainer words.

"My dear fellow," said Herbert, "let the near prospect of ourseparation--for, it is very near--be my justification fortroubling you about yourself.  Have you thought of your future?"

"No, for I have been afraid to think of any future."

"But yours cannot be dismissed; indeed, my dear dear Handel, itmust not be dismissed.  I wish you would enter on it now, as far asa few friendly words go, with me."

"I will," said I.

"In this branch house of ours, Handel, we must have a--"

I saw that his delicacy was avoiding the right word, so I said, "Aclerk."

"A clerk.  And I hope it is not at all unlikely that he may expand(as a clerk of your acquaintance has expanded) into a partner.  Now,Handel,--in short, my dear boy, will you come to me?"

There was something charmingly cordial and engaging in the mannerin which after saying "Now, Handel," as if it were the gravebeginning of a portentous business exordium, he had suddenly givenup that tone, stretched out his honest hand, and spoken like aschoolboy.

"Clara and I have talked about it again and again," Herbertpursued, "and the dear little thing begged me only this evening,with tears in her eyes, to say to you that, if you will live with uswhen we come together, she will do her best to make you happy, andto convince her husband's friend that he is her friend too.  Weshould get on so well, Handel!"

I thanked her heartily, and I thanked him heartily, but said Icould not yet make sure of joining him as he so kindly offered.Firstly, my mind was too preoccupied to be able to take in thesubject clearly.  Secondly,--Yes!  Secondly, there was a vaguesomething lingering in my thoughts that will come out very near theend of this slight narrative.

"But if you thought, Herbert, that you could, without doing anyinjury to your business, leave the question open for a littlewhile--"

"For any while," cried Herbert.  "Six months, a year!"

"Not so long as that," said I.  "Two or three months at most."

Herbert was highly delighted when we shook hands on thisarrangement, and said he could now take courage to tell me that hebelieved he must go away at the end of the week.

"And Clara?" said I.

"The dear little thing," returned Herbert, "holds dutifully to herfather as long as he lasts; but he won't last long.  Mrs. Whimpleconfides to me that he is certainly going."

"Not to say an unfeeling thing," said I, "he cannot do better thango."

"I am afraid that must be admitted," said Herbert; "and then Ishall come back for the dear little thing, and the dear littlething and I will walk quietly into the nearest church.  Remember!The blessed darling comes of no family, my dear Handel, and neverlooked into the red book, and hasn't a notion about her grandpapa.What a fortune for the son of my mother!"

On the Saturday in that same week, I took my leave of Herbert,--full of bright hope, but sad and sorry to leave me,--as he sat onone of the seaport mail coaches.  I went into a coffee-house towrite a little note to Clara, telling her he had gone off, sendinghis love to her over and over again, and then went to my lonelyhome,--if it deserved the name; for it was now no home to me, and Ihad no home anywhere.

On the stairs I encountered Wemmick, who was coming down, after anunsuccessful application of his knuckles to my door.  I had not seenhim alone since the disastrous issue of the attempted flight; andhe had come, in his private and personal capacity, to say a fewwords of explanation in reference to that failure.

"The late Compeyson," said Wemmick, "had by little and little gotat the bottom of half of the regular business now transacted; andit was from the talk of some of his people in trouble (some of hispeople being always in trouble) that I heard what I did.  I kept myears open, seeming to have them shut, until I heard that he wasabsent, and I thought that would be the best time for making theattempt.  I can only suppose now, that it was a part of his policy,as a very clever man, habitually to deceive his own instruments.You don't blame me, I hope, Mr. Pip?  I am sure I tried to serve you,with all my heart."

"I am as sure of that, Wemmick, as you can be, and I thank you mostearnestly for all your interest and friendship."

"Thank you, thank you very much.  It's a bad job," said Wemmick,scratching his head, "and I assure you I haven't been so cut up fora long time.  What I look at is the sacrifice of so much portableproperty.  Dear me!"

"What I think of, Wemmick, is the poor owner of the property."

"Yes, to be sure," said Wemmick.  "Of course, there can be noobjection to your being sorry for him, and I'd put down afive-pound note myself to get him out of it.  But what I look at isthis.  The late Compeyson having been beforehand with him inintelligence of his return, and being so determined to bring him tobook, I do not think he could have been saved.  Whereas, theportable property certainly could have been saved.  That's thedifference between the property and the owner, don't you see?"

I invited Wemmick to come up stairs, and refresh himself with aglass of grog before walking to Walworth.  He accepted theinvitation.  While he was drinking his moderate allowance, he said,with nothing to lead up to it, and after having appeared ratherfidgety,--

"What do you think of my meaning to take a holiday on Monday, Mr.Pip?"

"Why, I suppose you have not done such a thing these twelvemonths."

"These twelve years, more likely," said Wemmick.  "Yes.  I'm going totake a holiday.  More than that; I'm going to take a walk.  More thanthat; I'm going to ask you to take a walk with me."

I was about to excuse myself, as being but a bad companion justthen, when Wemmick anticipated me.

"I know your engagements," said he, "and I know you are out ofsorts, Mr. Pip.  But if you could oblige me, I should take it as akindness.  It ain't a long walk, and it's an early one.  Say it mightoccupy you (including breakfast on the walk) from eight to twelve.Couldn't you stretch a point and manage it?"

He had done so much for me at various times, that this was verylittle to do for him.  I said I could manage it,--would manage it,--and he was so very much pleased by my acquiescence, that I waspleased too.  At his particular request, I appointed to call for himat the Castle at half past eight on Monday morning, and so weparted for the time.

Punctual to my appointment, I rang at the Castle gate on the Mondaymorning, and was received by Wemmick himself, who struck me aslooking tighter than usual, and having a sleeker hat on.  Within,there were two glasses of rum and milk prepared, and two biscuits.The Aged must have been stirring with the lark, for, glancing intothe perspective of his bedroom, I observed that his bed was empty.

When we had fortified ourselves with the rum and milk and biscuits,and were going out for the walk with that training preparation onus, I was considerably surprised to see Wemmick take up afishing-rod, and put it over his shoulder.  "Why, we are not goingfishing!" said I.  "No," returned Wemmick, "but I like to walk withone."

I thought this odd; however, I said nothing, and we set off.  Wewent towards Camberwell Green, and when we were thereabouts,Wemmick said suddenly,--

"Halloa!  Here's a church!"

There was nothing very surprising in that; but again, I was rathersurprised, when he said, as if he were animated by a brilliantidea,--

"Let's go in!"

We went in, Wemmick leaving his fishing-rod in the porch, andlooked all round.  In the mean time, Wemmick was diving into hiscoat-pockets, and getting something out of paper there.

"Halloa!" said he.  "Here's a couple of pair of gloves!  Let's put'em on!"

As the gloves were white kid gloves, and as the post-office waswidened to its utmost extent, I now began to have my strongsuspicions.  They were strengthened into certainty when I beheld theAged enter at a side door, escorting a lady.

"Halloa!" said Wemmick.  "Here's Miss Skiffins!  Let's have awedding."

That discreet damsel was attired as usual, except that she was nowengaged in substituting for her green kid gloves a pair of white.The Aged was likewise occupied in preparing a similar sacrifice forthe altar of Hymen.  The old gentleman, however, experienced so muchdifficulty in getting his gloves on, that Wemmick found itnecessary to put him with his back against a pillar, and then toget behind the pillar himself and pull away at them, while I for mypart held the old gentleman round the waist, that he might presentand equal and safe resistance.  By dint of this ingenious scheme,his gloves were got on to perfection.

The clerk and clergyman then appearing, we were ranged in order atthose fatal rails.  True to his notion of seeming to do it allwithout preparation, I heard Wemmick say to himself, as he tooksomething out of his waistcoat-pocket before the service began,"Halloa!  Here's a ring!"

I acted in the capacity of backer, or best-man, to the bridegroom;while a little limp pew-opener in a soft bonnet like a baby's, madea feint of being the bosom friend of Miss Skiffins.  Theresponsibility of giving the lady away devolved upon the Aged,which led to the clergyman's being unintentionally scandalized, andit happened thus.  When he said, "Who giveth this woman to bemarried to this man?" the old gentlemen, not in the least knowingwhat point of the ceremony we had arrived at, stood most amiablybeaming at the ten commandments.  Upon which, the clergyman saidagain, "WHO giveth this woman to be married to this man?"  The oldgentleman being still in a state of most estimable unconsciousness,the bridegroom cried out in his accustomed voice, "Now Aged P.  youknow; who giveth?"  To which the Aged replied with great briskness,before saying that he gave, "All right, John, all right, my boy!"And the clergyman came to so gloomy a pause upon it, that I haddoubts for the moment whether we should get completely married thatday.

It was completely done, however, and when we were going out ofchurch Wemmick took the cover off the font, and put his whitegloves in it, and put the cover on again.  Mrs. Wemmick, more heedfulof the future, put her white gloves in her pocket and assumed hergreen.  "Now, Mr. Pip," said Wemmick, triumphantly shouldering thefishing-rod as we came out, "let me ask you whether anybody wouldsuppose this to be a wedding-party!"

Breakfast had been ordered at a pleasant little tavern, a mile orso away upon the rising ground beyond the green; and there was abagatelle board in the room, in case we should desire to unbend ourminds after the solemnity.  It was pleasant to observe that Mrs.Wemmick no longer unwound Wemmick's arm when it adapted itself toher figure, but sat in a high-backed chair against the wall, like avioloncello in its case, and submitted to be embraced as thatmelodious instrument might have done.

We had an excellent breakfast, and when any one declined anythingon table, Wemmick said, "Provided by contract, you know; don't beafraid of it!"  I drank to the new couple, drank to the Aged, drankto the Castle, saluted the bride at parting, and made myself asagreeable as I could.

Wemmick came down to the door with me, and I again shook hands withhim, and wished him joy.

"Thankee!" said Wemmick, rubbing his hands.  "She's such a managerof fowls, you have no idea.  You shall have some eggs, and judge foryourself.  I say, Mr. Pip!" calling me back, and speaking low.  "Thisis altogether a Walworth sentiment, please."

"I understand.  Not to be mentioned in Little Britain," said I.

Wemmick nodded.  "After what you let out the other day, Mr. Jaggersmay as well not know of it.  He might think my brain was softening,or something of the kind."

Chapter LVI

He lay in prison very ill, during the whole interval between hiscommittal for trial and the coming round of the Sessions.  He hadbroken two ribs, they had wounded one of his lungs, and he breathedwith great pain and difficulty, which increased daily.  It was aconsequence of his hurt that he spoke so low as to be scarcelyaudible; therefore he spoke very little.  But he was ever ready tolisten to me; and it became the first duty of my life to say tohim, and read to him, what I knew he ought to hear.

Being far too ill to remain in the common prison, he was removed,after the first day or so, into the infirmary.  This gave meopportunities of being with him that I could not otherwise havehad.  And but for his illness he would have been put in irons, forhe was regarded as a determined prison-breaker, and I know not whatelse.

Although I saw him every day, it was for only a short time; hence,the regularly recurring spaces of our separation were long enoughto record on his face any slight changes that occurred in hisphysical state.  I do not recollect that I once saw any change in itfor the better; he wasted, and became slowly weaker and worse, dayby day, from the day when the prison door closed upon him.

The kind of submission or resignation that he showed was that of aman who was tired out.  I sometimes derived an impression, from hismanner or from a whispered word or two which escaped him, that hepondered over the question whether he might have been a better manunder better circumstances.  But he never justified himself by ahint tending that way, or tried to bend the past out of its eternalshape.

It happened on two or three occasions in my presence, that hisdesperate reputation was alluded to by one or other of the peoplein attendance on him.  A smile crossed his face then, and he turnedhis eyes on me with a trustful look, as if he were confident that Ihad seen some small redeeming touch in him, even so long ago as whenI was a little child.  As to all the rest, he was humble andcontrite, and I never knew him complain.

When the Sessions came round, Mr. Jaggers caused an application tobe made for the postponement of his trial until the followingSessions.  It was obviously made with the assurance that he couldnot live so long, and was refused.  The trial came on at once, and,when he was put to the bar, he was seated in a chair.  No objectionwas made to my getting close to the dock, on the outside of it, andholding the hand that he stretched forth to me.

The trial was very short and very clear.  Such things as could besaid for him were said,--how he had taken to industrious habits,and had thriven lawfully and reputably.  But nothing could unsaythe fact that he had returned, and was there in presence of theJudge and Jury.  It was impossible to try him for that, and dootherwise than find him guilty.

At that time, it was the custom (as I learnt from my terribleexperience of that Sessions) to devote a concluding day to thepassing of Sentences, and to make a finishing effect with theSentence of Death.  But for the indelible picture that myremembrance now holds before me, I could scarcely believe, even asI write these words, that I saw two-and-thirty men and women putbefore the Judge to receive that sentence together.  Foremost amongthe two-and-thirty was he; seated, that he might get breath enoughto keep life in him.

The whole scene starts out again in the vivid colors of themoment, down to the drops of April rain on the windows of thecourt, glittering in the rays of April sun.  Penned in the dock, asI again stood outside it at the corner with his hand in mine, werethe two-and-thirty men and women; some defiant, some stricken withterror, some sobbing and weeping, some covering their faces, somestaring gloomily about.  There had been shrieks from among the womenconvicts; but they had been stilled,and a hush had succeeded.  Thesheriffs with their great chains and nosegays, other civic gewgawsand monsters, criers, ushers, a great gallery full of people,--alarge theatrical audience,--looked on, as the two-and-thirty andthe Judge were solemnly confronted.  Then the Judge addressed them.Among the wretched creatures before him whom he must single out forspecial address was one who almost from his infancy had been anoffender against the laws; who, after repeated imprisonments andpunishments, had been at length sentenced to exile for a term ofyears; and who, under circumstances of great violence and daring,had made his escape and been re-sentenced to exile for life.  Thatmiserable man would seem for a time to have become convinced of hiserrors, when far removed from the scenes of his old offences, andto have lived a peaceable and honest life.  But in a fatal moment,yielding to those propensities and passions, the indulgence ofwhich had so long rendered him a scourge to society, he had quittedhis haven of rest and repentance, and had come back to the countrywhere he was proscribed.  Being here presently denounced, he had fora time succeeded in evading the officers of Justice, but being atlength seized while in the act of flight, he had resisted them, andhad--he best knew whether by express design, or in the blindnessof his hardihood--caused the death of his denouncer, to whom hiswhole career was known.  The appointed punishment for his return tothe land that had cast him out, being Death, and his case beingthis aggravated case, he must prepare himself to Die.

The sun was striking in at the great windows of the court, throughthe glittering drops of rain upon the glass, and it made a broadshaft of light between the two-and-thirty and the Judge, linkingboth together, and perhaps reminding some among the audience howboth were passing on, with absolute equality, to the greaterJudgment that knoweth all things, and cannot err.  Rising for amoment, a distinct speck of face in this way of light, the prisonersaid, "My Lord, I have received my sentence of Death from theAlmighty, but I bow to yours," and sat down again.  There was somehushing, and the Judge went on with what he had to say to the rest.Then they were all formally doomed, and some of them weresupported out, and some of them sauntered out with a haggard lookof bravery, and a few nodded to the gallery, and two or three shookhands, and others went out chewing the fragments of herb they hadtaken from the sweet herbs lying about.  He went last of all,because of having to be helped from his chair, and to go veryslowly; and he held my hand while all the others were removed, andwhile the audience got up (putting their dresses right, as theymight at church or elsewhere), and pointed down at this criminal orat that, and most of all at him and me.

I earnestly hoped and prayed that he might die before theRecorder's Report was made; but, in the dread of his lingering on,I began that night to write out a petition to the Home Secretary ofState, setting forth my knowledge of him, and how it was that hehad come back for my sake.  I wrote it as fervently and patheticallyas I could; and when I had finished it and sent it in, I wrote outother petitions to such men in authority as I hoped were the mostmerciful, and drew up one to the Crown itself.  For several days andnights after he was sentenced I took no rest except when I fellasleep in my chair, but was wholly absorbed in these appeals.  Andafter I had sent them in, I could not keep away from the placeswhere they were, but felt as if they were more hopeful and lessdesperate when I was near them.  In this unreasonable restlessnessand pain of mind I would roam the streets of an evening, wanderingby those offices and houses where I had left the petitions.  To thepresent hour, the weary western streets of London on a cold, dustyspring night, with their ranges of stern, shut-up mansions, and theirlong rows of lamps, are melancholy to me from this association.

The daily visits I could make him were shortened now, and he wasmore strictly kept.  Seeing, or fancying, that I was suspected of anintention of carrying poison to him, I asked to be searched beforeI sat down at his bedside, and told the officer who was alwaysthere, that I was willing to do anything that would assure him ofthe singleness of my designs.  Nobody was hard with him or with me.There was duty to be done, and it was done, but not harshly.  Theofficer always gave me the assurance that he was worse, and someother sick prisoners in the room, and some other prisoners whoattended on them as sick nurses, (malefactors, but not incapable ofkindness, God be thanked!) always joined in the same report.

As the days went on, I noticed more and more that he would lieplacidly looking at the white ceiling, with an absence of light inhis face until some word of mine brightened it for an instant, andthen it would subside again.  Sometimes he was almost or quiteunable to speak, then he would answer me with slight pressures onmy hand, and I grew to understand his meaning very well.

The number of the days had risen to ten, when I saw a greaterchange in him than I had seen yet.  His eyes were turned towards thedoor, and lighted up as I entered.

"Dear boy," he said, as I sat down by his bed:  "I thought you waslate.  But I knowed you couldn't be that."

"It is just the time," said I.  "I waited for it at the gate."

"You always waits at the gate; don't you, dear boy?"

"Yes.  Not to lose a moment of the time."

"Thank'ee dear boy, thank'ee.  God bless you!  You've never desertedme, dear boy."

I pressed his hand in silence, for I could not forget that I hadonce meant to desert him.

"And what's the best of all," he said, "you've been morecomfortable alonger me, since I was under a dark cloud, than whenthe sun shone.  That's best of all."

He lay on his back, breathing with great difficulty.  Do what hewould, and love me though he did, the light left his face ever andagain, and a film came over the placid look at the white ceiling.

"Are you in much pain to-day?"

"I don't complain of none, dear boy."

"You never do complain."

He had spoken his last words.  He smiled, and I understood his touchto mean that he wished to lift my hand, and lay it on his breast.  Ilaid it there, and he smiled again, and put both his hands upon it.

The allotted time ran out, while we were thus; but, looking round,I found the governor of the prison standing near me, and hewhispered, "You needn't go yet."  I thanked him gratefully, andasked, "Might I speak to him, if he can hear me?"

The governor stepped aside, and beckoned the officer away.  Thechange, though it was made without noise, drew back the film fromthe placid look at the white ceiling, and he looked mostaffectionately at me.

"Dear Magwitch, I must tell you now, at last.  You understand what Isay?"

A gentle pressure on my hand.

"You had a child once, whom you loved and lost."

A stronger pressure on my hand.

"She lived, and found powerful friends.  She is living now.  She is alady and very beautiful.  And I love her!"

With a last faint effort, which would have been powerless but formy yielding to it and assisting it, he raised my hand to his lips.Then, he gently let it sink upon his breast again, with his ownhands lying on it.  The placid look at the white ceiling came back,and passed away, and his head dropped quietly on his breast.

Mindful, then, of what we had read together, I thought of the twomen who went up into the Temple to pray, and I knew there were nobetter words that I could say beside his bed, than "O Lord, bemerciful to him a sinner!"

Chapter LVII

Now that I was left wholly to myself, I gave notice of my intentionto quit the chambers in the Temple as soon as my tenancy couldlegally determine, and in the meanwhile to underlet them.  At once Iput bills up in the windows; for, I was in debt, and had scarcelyany money, and began to be seriously alarmed by the state of myaffairs.  I ought rather to write that I should have been alarmed ifI had had energy and concentration enough to help me to the clearperception of any truth beyond the fact that I was falling veryill.  The late stress upon me had enabled me to put off illness, butnot to put it away; I knew that it was coming on me now, and I knewvery little else, and was even careless as to that.

For a day or two, I lay on the sofa, or on the floor,--anywhere,according as I happened to sink down,--with a heavy head and achinglimbs, and no purpose, and no power.  Then there came, one nightwhich appeared of great duration, and which teemed with anxiety andhorror; and when in the morning I tried to sit up in my bed andthink of it, I found I could not do so.

Whether I really had been down in Garden Court in the dead of thenight, groping about for the boat that I supposed to be there;whether I had two or three times come to myself on the staircasewith great terror, not knowing how I had got out of bed; whether Ihad found myself lighting the lamp, possessed by the idea that hewas coming up the stairs, and that the lights were blown out;whether I had been inexpressibly harassed by the distractedtalking, laughing, and groaning of some one, and had halfsuspected those sounds to be of my own making; whether there hadbeen a closed iron furnace in a dark corner of the room, and avoice had called out, over and over again, that Miss Havisham wasconsuming within it,--these were things that I tried to settle withmyself and get into some order, as I lay that morning on my bed.But the vapor of a limekiln would come between me and them,disordering them all, and it was through the vapor at last that Isaw two men looking at me.

"What do you want?" I asked, starting; "I don't know you."

"Well, sir," returned one of them, bending down and touching me onthe shoulder, "this is a matter that you'll soon arrange, I daresay, but you're arrested."

"What is the debt?"

"Hundred and twenty-three pound, fifteen, six.  Jeweller's account,I think."

"What is to be done?"

"You had better come to my house," said the man.  "I keep a verynice house."

I made some attempt to get up and dress myself.  When I nextattended to them, they were standing a little off from the bed,looking at me.  I still lay there.

"You see my state," said I.  "I would come with you if I could; butindeed I am quite unable.  If you take me from here, I think I shalldie by the way."

Perhaps they replied, or argued the point, or tried to encourage meto believe that I was better than I thought.  Forasmuch as they hangin my memory by only this one slender thread, I don't know whatthey did, except that they forbore to remove me.

That I had a fever and was avoided, that I suffered greatly, that Ioften lost my reason, that the time seemed interminable, that Iconfounded impossible existences with my own identity; that I was abrick in the house-wall, and yet entreating to be released from thegiddy place where the builders had set me; that I was a steel beamof a vast engine, clashing and whirling over a gulf, and yet that Iimplored in my own person to have the engine stopped, and my partin it hammered off; that I passed through these phases of disease,I know of my own remembrance, and did in some sort know at thetime.  That I sometimes struggled with real people, in the beliefthat they were murderers, and that I would all at once comprehendthat they meant to do me good, and would then sink exhausted intheir arms, and suffer them to lay me down, I also knew at thetime.  But, above all, I knew that there was a constant tendency inall these people,--who, when I was very ill, would present allkinds of extraordinary transformations of the human face, and wouldbe much dilated in size,--above all, I say, I knew that there wasan extraordinary tendency in all these people, sooner or later, tosettle down into the likeness of Joe.

After I had turned the worst point of my illness, I began to noticethat while all its other features changed, this one consistentfeature did not change.  Whoever came about me, still settled downinto Joe.  I opened my eyes in the night, and I saw, in the greatchair at the bedside, Joe.  I opened my eyes in the day, and,sitting on the window-seat, smoking his pipe in the shaded openwindow, still I saw Joe.  I asked for cooling drink, and the dearhand that gave it me was Joe's.  I sank back on my pillow afterdrinking, and the face that looked so hopefully and tenderly uponme was the face of Joe.

At last, one day, I took courage, and said, "Is it Joe?"

And the dear old home-voice answered, "Which it air, old chap."

"O Joe, you break my heart!  Look angry at me, Joe.  Strike me, Joe.Tell me of my ingratitude.  Don't be so good to me!"

For Joe had actually laid his head down on the pillow at my side,and put his arm round my neck, in his joy that I knew him.

"Which dear old Pip, old chap," said Joe, "you and me was everfriends.  And when you're well enough to go out for a ride--whatlarks!"

After which, Joe withdrew to the window, and stood with his backtowards me, wiping his eyes.  And as my extreme weakness preventedme from getting up and going to him, I lay there, penitentlywhispering, "O God bless him!  O God bless this gentle Christianman!"

Joe's eyes were red when I next found him beside me; but I washolding his hand, and we both felt happy.

"How long, dear Joe?"

"Which you meantersay, Pip, how long have your illness lasted, dearold chap?"

"Yes, Joe."

"It's the end of May, Pip.  To-morrow is the first of June."

"And have you been here all that time, dear Joe?"

"Pretty nigh, old chap.  For, as I says to Biddy when the news ofyour being ill were brought by letter, which it were brought by thepost, and being formerly single he is now married though underpaidfor a deal of walking and shoe-leather, but wealth were not aobject on his part, and marriage were the great wish of his hart--"

"It is so delightful to hear you, Joe!  But I interrupt you in whatyou said to Biddy."

"Which it were," said Joe, "that how you might be amongststrangers, and that how you and me having been ever friends, awisit at such a moment might not prove unacceptabobble.  And Biddy,her word were, 'Go to him, without loss of time.'  That," said Joe,summing up with his judicial air, "were the word of Biddy.  'Go tohim,' Biddy say, 'without loss of time.'  In short, I shouldn'tgreatly deceive you," Joe added, after a little grave reflection,"if I represented to you that the word of that young woman were,'without a minute's loss of time.'"

There Joe cut himself short, and informed me that I was to betalked to in great moderation, and that I was to take a littlenourishment at stated frequent times, whether I felt inclined forit or not, and that I was to submit myself to all his orders.  So Ikissed his hand, and lay quiet, while he proceeded to indite a noteto Biddy, with my love in it.

Evidently Biddy had taught Joe to write.  As I lay in bed lookingat him, it made me, in my weak state, cry again with pleasure tosee the pride with which he set about his letter.  My bedstead,divested of its curtains, had been removed, with me upon it, intothe sitting-room, as the airiest and largest, and the carpet hadbeen taken away, and the room kept always fresh and wholesome nightand day.  At my own writing-table, pushed into a corner and cumberedwith little bottles, Joe now sat down to his great work, firstchoosing a pen from the pen-tray as if it were a chest of largetools, and tucking up his sleeves as if he were going to wield acrow-bar or sledgehammer.  It was necessary for Joe to hold onheavily to the table with his left elbow, and to get his right legwell out behind him, before he could begin; and when he did beginhe made every down-stroke so slowly that it might have been sixfeet long, while at every up-stroke I could hear his penspluttering extensively.  He had a curious idea that the inkstandwas on the side of him where it was not, and constantly dipped hispen into space, and seemed quite satisfied with the result.Occasionally, he was tripped up by some orthographicalstumbling-block; but on the whole he got on very well indeed; andwhen he had signed his name, and had removed a finishing blot fromthe paper to the crown of his head with his two forefingers, he gotup and hovered about the table, trying the effect of hisperformance from various points of view,  as it lay there, withunbounded satisfaction.

Not to make Joe uneasy by talking too much, even if I had been ableto talk much, I deferred asking him about Miss Havisham until nextday.  He shook his head when I then asked him if she had recovered.

"Is she dead, Joe?"

"Why you see, old chap," said Joe, in a tone of remonstrance, andby way of getting at it by degrees, "I wouldn't go so far as to saythat, for that's a deal to say; but she ain't--"

"Living, Joe?"

"That's nigher where it is," said Joe; "she ain't living."

"Did she linger long, Joe?"

"Arter you was took ill, pretty much about what you might call (ifyou was put to it) a week," said Joe; still determined, on myaccount, to come at everything by degrees.

"Dear Joe, have you heard what becomes of her property?"

"Well, old chap," said Joe, "it do appear that she had settled themost of it, which I meantersay tied it up, on Miss Estella.  But shehad wrote out a little coddleshell in her own hand a day or twoafore the accident, leaving a cool four thousand to Mr. MatthewPocket.  And why, do you suppose, above all things, Pip, she leftthat cool four thousand unto him?  'Because of Pip's account of him,the said Matthew.'  I am told by Biddy, that air the writing," saidJoe, repeating the legal turn as if it did him infinite good,'account of him the said Matthew.'  And a cool four thousand, Pip!"

I never discovered from whom Joe derived the conventionaltemperature of the four thousand pounds; but it appeared to makethe sum of money more to him, and he had a manifest relish ininsisting on its being cool.

This account gave me great joy, as it perfected the only good thingI had done.  I asked Joe whether he had heard if any of the otherrelations had any legacies?

"Miss Sarah," said Joe, "she have twenty-five pound perannium furto buy pills, on account of being bilious.  Miss Georgiana, she havetwenty pound down.  Mrs.--what's the name of them wild beasts withhumps, old chap?"

"Camels?" said I, wondering why he could possibly want to know.

Joe nodded.  "Mrs. Camels," by which I presently understood he meantCamilla, "she have five pound fur to buy rushlights to put her inspirits when she wake up in the night."

The accuracy of these recitals was sufficiently obvious to me, togive me great confidence in Joe's information.  "And now," said Joe,"you ain't that strong yet, old chap, that you can take in more norone additional shovelful to-day.  Old Orlick he's been abustin' open a dwelling-ouse."

"Whose?" said I.

"Not, I grant you, but what his manners is given to blusterous,"said Joe, apologetically; "still, a Englishman's ouse is hisCastle, and castles must not be busted 'cept when done in war time.And wotsume'er the failings on his part, he were a corn andseedsman in his hart."

"Is it Pumblechook's house that has been broken into, then?"

"That's it, Pip," said Joe; "and they took his till, and they tookhis cash-box, and they drinked his wine, and they partook of hiswittles, and they slapped his face, and they pulled his nose, andthey tied him up to his bedpust, and they giv' him a dozen, andthey stuffed his mouth full of flowering annuals to prewent hiscrying out.  But he knowed Orlick, and Orlick's in the countyjail."

By these approaches we arrived at unrestricted conversation.  I wasslow to gain strength, but I did slowly and surely become lessweak, and Joe stayed with me, and I fancied I was little Pip again.

For the tenderness of Joe was so beautifully proportioned to myneed, that I was like a child in his hands.  He would sit and talkto me in the old confidence, and with the old simplicity, and inthe old unassertive protecting way, so that I would half believethat all my life since the days of the old kitchen was one of themental troubles of the fever that was gone.  He did everything forme except the household work, for which he had engaged a verydecent woman, after paying off the laundress on his first arrival."Which I do assure you, Pip," he would often say, in explanation ofthat liberty; "I found her a tapping the spare bed, like a cask ofbeer, and drawing off the feathers in a bucket, for sale.  Which shewould have tapped yourn next, and draw'd it off with you a layingon it, and was then a carrying away the coals gradiwally in thesoup-tureen and wegetable-dishes, and the wine and spirits in yourWellington boots."

We looked forward to the day when I should go out for a ride, as wehad once looked forward to the day of my apprenticeship.  And whenthe day came, and an open carriage was got into the Lane, Joewrapped me up, took me in his arms, carried me down to it, and putme in, as if I were still the small helpless creature to whom hehad so abundantly given of the wealth of his great nature.

And Joe got in beside me, and we drove away together into thecountry, where the rich summer growth was already on the trees andon the grass, and sweet summer scents filled all the air.  The dayhappened to be Sunday, and when I looked on the loveliness aroundme, and thought how it had grown and changed, and how the littlewild-flowers had been forming, and the voices of the birds had beenstrengthening, by day and by night, under the sun and under thestars, while poor I lay burning and tossing on my bed, the mereremembrance of having burned and tossed there came like a checkupon my peace.  But when I heard the Sunday bells, and lookedaround a little more upon the outspread beauty, I felt that I wasnot nearly thankful enough,--that I was too weak yet to be eventhat,--and I laid my head on Joe's shoulder, as I had laid it longago when he had taken me to the Fair or where not, and it was toomuch for my young senses.

More composure came to me after a while, and we talked as we usedto talk, lying on the grass at the old Battery.  There was no changewhatever in Joe.  Exactly what he had been in my eyes then, he wasin my eyes still; just as simply faithful, and as simply right.

When we got back again, and he lifted me out, and carried me--soeasily!--across the court and up the stairs, I thought of thateventful Christmas Day when he had carried me over the marshes.  Wehad not yet made any allusion to my change of fortune, nor did Iknow how much of my late history he was acquainted with.  I was sodoubtful of myself now, and put so much trust in him, that I couldnot satisfy myself whether I ought to refer to it when he did not.

"Have you heard, Joe," I asked him that evening, upon furtherconsideration, as he smoked his pipe at the window, "who my patronwas?"

"I heerd," returned Joe, "as it were not Miss Havisham, old chap."

"Did you hear who it was, Joe?"

"Well!  I heerd as it were a person what sent the person whatgiv' you the bank-notes at the Jolly Bargemen, Pip."

"So it was."

"Astonishing!" said Joe, in the placidest way.

"Did you hear that he was dead, Joe?" I presently asked, withincreasing diffidence.

"Which?  Him as sent the bank-notes, Pip?"

"Yes."

"I think," said Joe, after meditating a long time, and lookingrather evasively at the window-seat, "as I did hear tell that howhe were something or another in a general way in that direction."

"Did you hear anything of his circumstances, Joe?"

"Not partickler, Pip."

"If you would like to hear, Joe--" I was beginning, when Joe got upand came to my sofa.

"Lookee here, old chap," said Joe, bending over me.  "Ever the bestof friends; ain't us, Pip?"

I was ashamed to answer him.

"Wery good, then," said Joe, as if I had answered; "that's allright; that's agreed upon.  Then why go into subjects, old chap,which as betwixt two sech must be for ever onnecessary?  There'ssubjects enough as betwixt two sech, without onnecessary ones.Lord!  To think of your poor sister and her Rampages!  And don't youremember Tickler?"

"I do indeed, Joe."

"Lookee here, old chap," said Joe.  "I done what I could to keep youand Tickler in sunders, but my power were not always fully equal tomy inclinations.  For when your poor sister had a mind to drop intoyou, it were not so much," said Joe, in his favorite argumentativeway, "that she dropped into me too, if I put myself in oppositionto her, but that she dropped into you always heavier for it.  Inoticed that.  It ain't a grab at a man's whisker, not yet a shakeor two of a man (to which your sister was quite welcome), that 'udput a man off from getting a little child out of punishment.  Butwhen that little child is dropped into heavier for that grab ofwhisker or shaking, then that man naterally up and says to himself,'Where is the good as you are a doing?  I grant you I see the 'arm,'says the man, 'but I don't see the good.  I call upon you, sir,therefore, to pint out the good.'"

"The man says?" I observed, as Joe waited for me to speak.

"The man says," Joe assented.  "Is he right, that man?"

"Dear Joe, he is always right."

"Well, old chap," said Joe, "then abide by your words.  If he'salways right (which in general he's more likely wrong), he's rightwhen he says this:  Supposing ever you kep any little matter toyourself, when you was a little child, you kep it mostly becauseyou know'd as J. Gargery's power to part you and Tickler insunders were not fully equal to his inclinations.  Theerfore, thinkno more of it as betwixt two sech, and do not let us pass remarksupon onnecessary subjects.  Biddy giv' herself a deal o' troublewith me afore I left (for I am almost awful dull), as I should viewit in this light, and, viewing it in this light, as I should so putit.  Both of which," said Joe, quite charmed with his logicalarrangement, "being done, now this to you a true friend, say.Namely.  You mustn't go a overdoing on it, but you must have yoursupper and your wine and water, and you must be put betwixt thesheets."

The delicacy with which Joe dismissed this theme, and the sweettact and kindness with which Biddy--who with her woman's wit hadfound me out so soon--had prepared him for it, made a deepimpression on my mind.  But whether Joe knew how poor I was, and howmy great expectations had all dissolved, like our own marsh mistsbefore the sun, I could not understand.

Another thing in Joe that I could not understand when it firstbegan to develop itself, but which I soon arrived at a sorrowfulcomprehension of, was this:  As I became stronger and better, Joebecame a little less easy with me.  In my weakness and entiredependence on him, the dear fellow had fallen into the old tone,and called me by the old names, the dear "old Pip, old chap," thatnow were music in my ears.  I too had fallen into the old ways, onlyhappy and thankful that he let me.  But, imperceptibly, though Iheld by them fast, Joe's hold upon them began to slacken; andwhereas I wondered at this, at first, I soon began to understandthat the cause of it was in me, and that the fault of it was allmine.

Ah!  Had I given Joe no reason to doubt my constancy, and to thinkthat in prosperity I should grow cold to him and cast him off?  HadI given Joe's innocent heart no cause to feel instinctively that asI got stronger, his hold upon me would be weaker, and that he hadbetter loosen it in time and let me go, before I plucked myselfaway?

It was on the third or fourth occasion of my going out walking inthe Temple Gardens leaning on Joe's arm, that I saw this change inhim very plainly.  We had been sitting in the bright warm sunlight,looking at the river, and I chanced to say as we got up,--

"See, Joe!  I can walk quite strongly.  Now, you shall see me walkback by myself."

"Which do not overdo it, Pip," said Joe; "but I shall be happy furto see you able, sir."

The last word grated on me; but how could I remonstrate!  I walkedno further than the gate of the gardens, and then pretended to beweaker than I was, and asked Joe for his arm.  Joe gave it me, butwas thoughtful.

I, for my part, was thoughtful too; for, how best to check thisgrowing change in Joe was a great perplexity to my remorsefulthoughts.  That I was ashamed to tell him exactly how I was placed,and what I had come down to, I do not seek to conceal; but I hopemy reluctance was not quite an unworthy one.  He would want to helpme out of his little savings, I knew, and I knew that he ought notto help me, and that I must not suffer him to do it.

It was a thoughtful evening with both of us.  But, before we went tobed, I had resolved that I would wait over to-morrow,--to-morrowbeing Sunday,--and would begin my new course with the new week.  OnMonday morning I would speak to Joe about this change, I would layaside this last vestige of reserve, I would tell him what I had inmy thoughts (that Secondly, not yet arrived at), and why I had notdecided to go out to Herbert, and then the change would beconquered for ever.  As I cleared, Joe cleared, and it seemed asthough he had sympathetically arrived at a resolution too.

We had a quiet day on the Sunday, and we rode out into the country,and then walked in the fields.

"I feel thankful that I have been ill, Joe," I said.

"Dear old Pip, old chap, you're a'most come round, sir."

"It has been a memorable time for me, Joe."

"Likeways for myself, sir," Joe returned.

"We have had a time together, Joe, that I can never forget.  Therewere days once, I know, that I did for a while forget; but I nevershall forget these."

"Pip," said Joe, appearing a little hurried and troubled, "therehas been larks. And, dear sir, what have been betwixt us--havebeen."

At night, when I had gone to bed, Joe came into my room, as he haddone all through my recovery.  He asked me if I felt sure that I wasas well as in the morning?

"Yes, dear Joe, quite."

"And are always a getting stronger, old chap?"

"Yes, dear Joe, steadily."

Joe patted the coverlet on my shoulder with his great good hand,and said, in what I thought a husky voice, "Good night!"

When I got up in the morning, refreshed and stronger yet, I wasfull of my resolution to tell Joe all, without delay.  I would tellhim before breakfast.  I would dress at once and go to his room andsurprise him; for, it was the first day I had been up early.  I wentto his room, and he was not there.  Not only was he not there, buthis box was gone.

I hurried then to the breakfast-table, and on it found a letter.These were its brief contents:--

"Not wishful to intrude I have departured fur you are well againdear Pip and will do better without  JO.

"P.S.  Ever the best of friends."

Enclosed in the letter was a receipt for the debt and costs onwhich I had been arrested.  Down to that moment, I had vainlysupposed that my creditor had withdrawn, or suspended proceedingsuntil I should be quite recovered.  I had never dreamed of Joe'shaving paid the money; but Joe had paid it, and the receipt was inhis name.

What remained for me now, but to follow him to the dear old forge,and there to have out my disclosure to him, and my penitentremonstrance with him, and there to relieve my mind and heart ofthat reserved Secondly, which had begun as a vague somethinglingering in my thoughts, and had formed into a settled purpose?

The purpose was, that I would go to Biddy, that I would show herhow humbled and repentant I came back, that I would tell her how Ihad lost all I once hoped for, that I would remind her of our oldconfidences in my first unhappy time.  Then I would say to her,"Biddy, I think you once liked me very well, when my errant heart,even while it strayed away from you, was quieter and better withyou than it ever has been since.  If you can like me only half aswell once more, if you can take me with all my faults anddisappointments on my head, if you can receive me like a forgivenchild (and indeed I am as sorry, Biddy, and have as much need of ahushing voice and a soothing hand), I hope I am a little worthierof you that I was,--not much, but a little.  And, Biddy, it shallrest with you to say whether I shall work at the forge with Joe, orwhether I shall try for any different occupation down in thiscountry, or whether we shall go away to a distant place where anopportunity awaits me which I set aside, when it was offered, untilI knew your answer.  And now, dear Biddy, if you can tell me thatyou will go through the world with me, you will surely make it abetter world for me, and me a better man for it, and I will tryhard to make it a better world for you."

Such was my purpose.  After three days more of recovery, I went downto the old place to put it in execution.  And how I sped in it isall I have left to tell.

Chapter LVIII

The tidings of my high fortunes having had a heavy fall had gotdown to my native place and its neighborhood before I got there.I found the Blue Boar in possession of the intelligence, and Ifound that it made a great change in the Boar's demeanour.  Whereasthe Boar had cultivated my good opinion with warm assiduity when Iwas coming into property, the Boar was exceedingly cool on thesubject now that I was going out of property.

It was evening when I arrived, much fatigued by the journey I hadso often made so easily.  The Boar could not put me into my usualbedroom, which was engaged (probably by some one who hadexpectations), and could only assign me a very indifferent chamberamong the pigeons and post-chaises up the yard.  But I had as sounda sleep in that lodging as in the most superior accommodation theBoar could have given me, and the quality of my dreams was aboutthe same as in the best bedroom.

Early in the morning, while my breakfast was getting ready, Istrolled round by Satis House.  There were printed bills on thegate and on bits of carpet hanging out of the windows, announcinga sale by auction of the Household Furniture and Effects, nextweek.  The House itself was to be sold as old building materials, andpulled down.  LOT 1 was marked in whitewashed knock-knee letters onthe brew house; LOT 2 on that part of the main building which hadbeen so long shut up.  Other lots were marked off on other parts ofthe structure, and the ivy had been torn down to make room for theinscriptions, and much of it trailed low in the dust and waswithered already.  Stepping in for a moment at the open gate, andlooking around me with the uncomfortable air of a stranger who hadno business there, I saw the auctioneer's clerk walking on thecasks and telling them off for the information of a catalogue-compiler, pen in hand, who made a temporary desk of the wheeledchair I had so often pushed along to the tune of Old Clem.

When I got back to my breakfast in the Boar's coffee-room, I foundMr. Pumblechook conversing with the landlord.  Mr. Pumblechook (notimproved in appearance by his late nocturnal adventure) was waitingfor me, and addressed me in the following terms:--

"Young man, I am sorry to see you brought low.  But what else couldbe expected!  what else could be expected!"

As he extended his hand with a magnificently forgiving air, and asI was broken by illness and unfit to quarrel, I took it.

"William," said Mr. Pumblechook to the waiter, "put a muffin ontable.  And has it come to this!  Has it come to this!"

I frowningly sat down to my breakfast.  Mr. Pumblechook stood over meand poured out my tea--before I could touch the teapot--with theair of a benefactor who was resolved to be true to the last.

"William," said Mr. Pumblechook, mournfully, "put the salt on.  Inhappier times," addressing me, "I think you took sugar?  And did youtake milk?  You did.  Sugar and milk.  William, bring a watercress."

"Thank you," said I, shortly, "but I don't eat watercresses."

"You don't eat 'em," returned Mr. Pumblechook, sighing and noddinghis head several times, as if he might have expected that, and asif abstinence from watercresses were consistent with my downfall."True.  The simple fruits of the earth.  No.  You needn't bring any,William."

I went on with my breakfast, and Mr. Pumblechook continued to standover me, staring fishily and breathing noisily, as he always did.

"Little more than skin and bone!" mused Mr. Pumblechook, aloud.  "Andyet when he went from here (I may say with my blessing), and Ispread afore him my humble store, like the Bee, he was as plump asa Peach!"

This reminded me of the wonderful difference between the servilemanner in which he had offered his hand in my new prosperity,saying, "May I?" and the ostentatious clemency with which he hadjust now exhibited the same fat five fingers.

"Hah!" he went on, handing me the bread and butter.  "And air youa going to Joseph?"

"In heaven's name," said I, firing in spite of myself, "what doesit matter to you where I am going?  Leave that teapot alone."

It was the worst course I could have taken, because it gavePumblechook the opportunity he wanted.

"Yes, young man," said he, releasing the handle of the article inquestion, retiring a step or two from my table, and speaking forthe behoof of the landlord and waiter at the door, "I will leavethat teapot alone.  You are right, young man.  For once you areright.  I forgit myself when I take such an interest in yourbreakfast, as to wish your frame, exhausted by the debilitatingeffects of prodigygality, to be stimilated by the 'olesomenourishment of your forefathers.  And yet," said Pumblechook,turning to the landlord and waiter, and pointing me out at arm'slength, "this is him as I ever sported with in his days of happyinfancy!  Tell me not it cannot be; I tell you this is him!"

A low murmur from the two replied.  The waiter appeared to beparticularly affected.

"This is him," said Pumblechook, "as I have rode in my shay-cart.This is him as I have seen brought up by hand.  This is him untoethe sister of which I was uncle by marriage, as her name wasGeorgiana M'ria from her own mother, let him deny it if he can!"

The waiter seemed convinced that I could not deny it, and that itgave the case a black look.

"Young man," said Pumblechook, screwing his head at me in the oldfashion, "you air a going to Joseph.  What does it matter to me, youask me, where you air a going?  I say to you, Sir, you air a goingto Joseph."

The waiter coughed, as if he modestly invited me to get over that.

"Now," said Pumblechook, and all this with a most exasperating airof saying in the cause of virtue what was perfectly convincing andconclusive, "I will tell you what to say to Joseph.  Here is Squiresof the Boar present, known and respected in this town, and here isWilliam, which his father's name was Potkins if I do not deceivemyself."

"You do not, sir," said William.

"In their presence," pursued Pumblechook, "I will tell you, youngman, what to say to Joseph.  Says you, "Joseph, I have this day seenmy earliest benefactor and the founder of my fortun's.  I will nameno names, Joseph, but so they are pleased to call him up town, andI have seen that man."

"I swear I don't see him here," said I.

"Say that likewise," retorted Pumblechook.  "Say you said that, andeven Joseph will probably betray surprise."

"There you quite mistake him," said I.  "I know better."

"Says you," Pumblechook went on, "'Joseph, I have seen that man, andthat man bears you no malice and bears me no malice.  He knows yourcharacter, Joseph, and is well acquainted with your pig-headednessand ignorance; and he knows my character, Joseph, and he knows mywant of gratitoode.  Yes, Joseph,' says you," here Pumblechook shookhis head and hand at me, "'he knows my total deficiency of commonhuman gratitoode.  He knows it, Joseph, as none can.  You do not knowit, Joseph, having no call to know it, but that man do.'"

Windy donkey as he was, it really amazed me that he could have theface to talk thus to mine.

"Says you, 'Joseph, he gave me a little message, which I will nowrepeat.  It was that, in my being brought low, he saw the finger ofProvidence.  He knowed that finger when he saw Joseph, and hesaw it plain.  It pinted out this writing, Joseph.  Reward ofingratitoode to his earliest benefactor, and founder of fortun's.But that man said he did not repent of what he had done, Joseph.Not at all.  It was right to do it, it was kind to do it, it wasbenevolent to do it, and he would do it again.'"

"It's pity," said I, scornfully, as I finished my interruptedbreakfast, "that the man did not say what he had done and would doagain."

"Squires of the Boar!"  Pumblechook was now addressing the landlord,"and William!  I have no objections to your mentioning, eitherup town or down town, if such should be your wishes, that it wasright to do it, kind to do it, benevolent to do it, and that Iwould do it again."

With those words the Impostor shook them both by the hand, with anair, and left the house; leaving me much more astonished thandelighted by the virtues of that same indefinite "it."  "I was notlong after him in leaving the house too, and when I went down theHigh Street I saw him holding forth (no doubt to the same effect)at his shop door to a select group, who honored me with veryunfavorable glances as I passed on the opposite side of the way.

But, it was only the pleasanter to turn to Biddy and to Joe, whosegreat forbearance shone more brightly than before, if that couldbe, contrasted with this brazen pretender.  I went towards themslowly, for my limbs were weak, but with a sense of increasingrelief as I drew nearer to them, and a sense of leaving arroganceand untruthfulness further and further behind.

The June weather was delicious.  The sky was blue, the larks weresoaring high over the green corn, I thought all that countrysidemore beautiful and peaceful by far than I had ever known it to beyet.  Many pleasant pictures of the life that I would lead there,and of the change for the better that would come over my characterwhen I had a guiding spirit at my side whose simple faith and clearhome wisdom I had proved, beguiled my way.  They awakened a tenderemotion in me; for my heart was softened by my return, and such achange had come to pass, that I felt like one who was toiling homebarefoot from distant travel, and whose wanderings had lasted manyyears.

The schoolhouse where Biddy was mistress I had never seen; but,the little roundabout lane by which I entered the village, forquietness' sake, took me past it.  I was disappointed to find thatthe day was a holiday; no children were there, and Biddy's housewas closed.  Some hopeful notion of seeing her, busily engaged in herdaily duties, before she saw me, had been in my mind and wasdefeated.

But the forge was a very short distance off, and I went towards itunder the sweet green limes, listening for the clink of Joe'shammer.  Long after I ought to have heard it, and long after I hadfancied I heard it and found it but a fancy, all was still.  Thelimes were there, and the white thorns were there, and thechestnut-trees were there, and their leaves rustled harmoniouslywhen I stopped to listen; but, the clink of Joe's hammer was not inthe midsummer wind.

Almost fearing, without knowing why, to come in view of the forge,I saw it at last, and saw that it was closed.  No gleam of fire, noglittering shower of sparks, no roar of bellows; all shut up, andstill.

But the house was not deserted, and the best parlor seemed to bein use, for there were white curtains fluttering in its window, andthe window was open and gay with flowers.  I went softly towards it,meaning to peep over the flowers, when Joe and Biddy stood beforeme, arm in arm.

At first Biddy gave a cry, as if she thought it was my apparition,but in another moment she was in my embrace.  I wept to see her, andshe wept to see me; I, because she looked so fresh and pleasant;she, because I looked so worn and white.

"But dear Biddy, how smart you are!"

"Yes, dear Pip."

"And Joe, how smart you are!"

"Yes, dear old Pip, old chap."

I looked at both of them, from one to the other, and then--

"It's my wedding-day!" cried Biddy, in a burst of happiness, "and Iam married to Joe!"

They had taken me into the kitchen, and I had laid my head down onthe old deal table.  Biddy held one of my hands to her lips, andJoe's restoring touch was on my shoulder.  "Which he warn't strongenough, my dear, fur to be surprised," said Joe.  And Biddy said, "Iought to have thought of it, dear Joe, but I was too happy."  Theywere both so overjoyed to see me, so proud to see me, so touched bymy coming to them, so delighted that I should have come by accidentto make their day complete!

My first thought was one of great thankfulness that I had neverbreathed this last baffled hope to Joe.  How often, while he waswith me in my illness, had it risen to my lips!  How irrevocablewould have been his knowledge of it, if he had remained with me butanother hour!

"Dear Biddy," said I, "you have the best husband in the wholeworld, and if you could have seen him by my bed you would have--But no, you couldn't love him better than you do."

"No, I couldn't indeed," said Biddy.

"And, dear Joe, you have the best wife in the whole world, and shewill make you as happy as even you deserve to be, you dear, good,noble Joe!"

Joe looked at me with a quivering lip, and fairly put his sleevebefore his eyes.

"And Joe and Biddy both, as you have been to church to-day, and arein charity and love with all mankind, receive my humble thanks forall you have done for me, and all I have so ill repaid!  And when Isay that I am going away within the hour, for I am soon goingabroad, and that I shall never rest until I have worked for themoney with which you have kept me out of prison, and have sent itto you, don't think, dear Joe and Biddy, that if I could repay it athousand times over, I suppose I could cancel a farthing of thedebt I owe you, or that I would do so if I could!"

They were both melted by these words, and both entreated me to sayno more.

"But I must say more.  Dear Joe, I hope you will have children tolove, and that some little fellow will sit in this chimney-cornerof a winter night, who may remind you of another little fellow goneout of it for ever.  Don't tell him, Joe, that I was thankless;don't tell him, Biddy, that I was ungenerous and unjust; only tellhim that I honored you both, because you were both so good andtrue, and that, as your child, I said it would be natural to him togrow up a much better man than I did."

"I ain't a going," said Joe, from behind his sleeve, "to tell himnothink o' that natur, Pip.  Nor Biddy ain't.  Nor yet no one ain't."

"And now, though I know you have already done it in your own kindhearts, pray tell me, both, that you forgive me!  Pray let me hearyou say the words, that I may carry the sound of them away with me,and then I shall be able to believe that you can trust me, andthink better of me, in the time to come!"

"O dear old Pip, old chap," said Joe.  "God knows as I forgive you,if I have anythink to forgive!"

"Amen!  And God knows I do!" echoed Biddy.

Now let me go up and look at my old little room, and rest there a fewminutes by myself.  And then, when I have eaten and drunk with you,go with me as far as the finger-post, dear Joe and Biddy, before wesay good by!"

I sold all I had, and put aside as much as I could, for acomposition with my creditors,--who gave me ample time to pay themin full,--and I went out and joined Herbert.  Within a month, I hadquitted England, and within two months I was clerk to Clarriker andCo., and within four months I assumed my first undividedresponsibility.  For the beam across the parlor ceiling at MillPond Bank had then ceased to tremble under old Bill Barley'sgrowls and was at peace, and Herbert had gone away to marry Clara,and I was left in sole charge of the Eastern Branch until hebrought her back.

Many a year went round before I was a partner in the House; butI lived happily with Herbert and his wife, and lived frugally, andpaid my debts, and maintained a constant correspondence with Biddyand Joe.  It was not until I became third in the Firm, thatClarriker betrayed me to Herbert; but he then declared that thesecret of Herbert's partnership had been long enough upon hisconscience, and he must tell it.  So he told it, and Herbert was asmuch moved as amazed, and the dear fellow and I were not the worsefriends for the long concealment.  I must not leave it to besupposed that we were ever a great House, or that we made mints ofmoney.  We were not in a grand way of business, but we had a goodname, and worked for our profits, and did very well.  We owed somuch to Herbert's ever cheerful industry and readiness, that Ioften wondered how I had conceived that old idea of his inaptitude,until I was one day enlightened by the reflection, that perhaps theinaptitude had never been in him at all, but had been in me.

Chapter LIX

For eleven years, I had not seen Joe nor Biddy with my bodilyEyes,--though they had both been often before my fancy in theEast,--when, upon an evening in December, an hour or two after dark,I laid my hand softly on the latch of the old kitchen door.  Itouched it so softly that I was not heard, and looked in unseen.There, smoking his pipe in the old place by the kitchen firelight,as hale and as strong as ever, though a little gray, sat Joe; andthere, fenced into the corner with Joe's leg, and sitting on my ownlittle stool looking at the fire, was--I again!

"We giv' him the name of Pip for your sake, dear old chap," saidJoe, delighted, when I took another stool by the child's side (but Idid not rumple his hair), "and we hoped he might grow a little bitlike you, and we think he do."

I thought so too, and I took him out for a walk next morning, andwe talked immensely, understanding one another to perfection.  And Itook him down to the churchyard, and set him on a certain tombstonethere, and he showed me from that elevation which stone was sacredto the memory of Philip Pirrip, late of this Parish, and AlsoGeorgiana, Wife of the Above.

"Biddy," said I, when I talked with her after dinner, as her littlegirl lay sleeping in her lap, "you must give Pip to me one ofthese days; or lend him, at all events."

"No, no," said Biddy, gently.  "You must marry."

"So Herbert and Clara say, but I don't think I shall, Biddy.  I haveso settled down in their home, that it's not at all likely.  I amalready quite an old bachelor."

Biddy looked down at her child, and put its little hand to herlips, and then put the good matronly hand with which she hadtouched it into mine.  There was something in the action, and in thelight pressure of Biddy's wedding-ring, that had a very prettyeloquence in it.

"Dear Pip," said Biddy, "you are sure you don't fret for her?"

"O no,--I think not, Biddy."

"Tell me as an old, old friend.  Have you quite forgotten her?

"My dear Biddy, I have forgotten nothing in my life that ever had aforemost place there, and little that ever had any place there.  Butthat poor dream, as I once used to call it, has all gone by, Biddy,--all gone by!"

Nevertheless, I knew, while I said those words, that I secretlyintended to revisit the site of the old house that evening, alone,for her sake.  Yes, even so.  For Estella's sake.

I had heard of her as leading a most unhappy life, and as beingseparated from her husband, who had used her with great cruelty,and who had become quite renowned as a compound of pride, avarice,brutality, and meanness.  And I had heard of the death of herhusband, from an accident consequent on his ill-treatment of ahorse.  This release had befallen her some two years before; foranything I knew, she was married again.

The early dinner hour at Joe's, left me abundance of time, withouthurrying my talk with Biddy, to walk over to the old spot beforedark.  But, what with loitering on the way to look at old objectsand to think of old times, the day had quite declined when I cameto the place.

There was no house now, no brewery, no building whatever left, butthe wall of the old garden.  The cleared space had been enclosedwith a rough fence, and looking over it, I saw that some of theold ivy had struck root anew, and was growing green on low quietmounds of ruin.  A gate in the fence standing ajar, I pushed itopen, and went in.

A cold silvery mist had veiled the afternoon, and the moon was notyet up to scatter it.  But, the stars were shining beyond the mist,and the moon was coming, and the evening was not dark.  I couldtrace out where every part of the old house had been, and where thebrewery had been, and where the gates, and where the casks.  I haddone so, and was looking along the desolate garden walk, when Ibeheld a solitary figure in it.

The figure showed itself aware of me, as I advanced.  It had beenmoving towards me, but it stood still.  As I drew nearer, I saw itto be the figure of a woman.  As I drew nearer yet, it was about toturn away, when it stopped, and let me come up with it.  Then, itfaltered, as if much surprised, and uttered my name, and I criedout,--

"Estella!"

"I am greatly changed.  I wonder you know me."

The freshness of her beauty was indeed gone, but its indescribablemajesty and its indescribable charm remained.  Those attractions init, I had seen before; what I had never seen before, was thesaddened, softened light of the once proud eyes; what I had neverfelt before was the friendly touch of the once insensible hand.

We sat down on a bench that was near, and I said, "After so manyyears, it is strange that we should thus meet again, Estella, herewhere our first meeting was!  Do you often come back?"

"I have never been here since."

"Nor I."

The moon began to rise, and I thought of the placid look at thewhite ceiling, which had passed away.  The moon began to rise, and Ithought of the pressure on my hand when I had spoken the last wordshe had heard on earth.

Estella was the next to break the silence that ensued between us.

"I have very often hoped and intended to come back, but have beenprevented by many circumstances.  Poor, poor old place!"

The silvery mist was touched with the first rays of the moonlight,and the same rays touched the tears that dropped from her eyes.  Notknowing that I saw them, and setting herself to get the better ofthem, she said quietly,--

"Were you wondering, as you walked along, how it came to be left inthis condition?"

"Yes, Estella."

"The ground belongs to me.  It is the only possession I have notrelinquished.  Everything else has gone from me, little by little,but I have kept this.  It was the subject of the only determinedresistance I made in all the wretched years."

"Is it to be built on?"

"At last, it is.  I came here to take leave of it before its change.And you," she said, in a voice of touching interest to a wanderer,--"you live abroad still?"

"Still."

"And do well, I am sure?"

"I work pretty hard for a sufficient living, and therefore--yes, Ido well."

"I have often thought of you," said Estella.

"Have you?"

"Of late, very often.  There was a long hard time when I kept farfrom me the remembrance of what I had thrown away when I wasquite ignorant of its worth.  But since my duty has not beenincompatible with the admission of that remembrance, I have givenit a place in my heart."

"You have always held your place in my heart," I answered.

And we were silent again until she spoke.

"I little thought," said Estella, "that I should take leave of youin taking leave of this spot.  I am very glad to do so."

"Glad to part again, Estella?  To me, parting is a painful thing.  Tome, the remembrance of our last parting has been ever mournful andpainful."

"But you said to me," returned Estella, very earnestly, 'God blessyou, God forgive you!'  And if you could say that to me then, youwill not hesitate to say that to me now,--now, when suffering hasbeen stronger than all other teaching, and has taught me tounderstand what your heart used to be.  I have been bent and broken,but--I hope--into a better shape.  Be as considerate and good tome as you were, and tell me we are friends."

"We are friends," said I, rising and bending over her, as she rosefrom the bench.

"And will continue friends apart," said Estella.

I took her hand in mine, and we went out of the ruined place; and,as the morning mists had risen long ago when I first left theforge, so the evening mists were rising now, and in all the broadexpanse of tranquil light they showed to me, I saw no shadow ofanother parting from her.





End of Project Gutenberg Etext of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens

